Developed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board as a textbook according 
to the National Curriculum 2022 for Class Six from the academic year 2023
History and Social Science
Class Six
Experimental version
Writers
Abul Momen
Professor M. Shahidul Islam
Professor Sharmind Neelormi
Professor Dr. Aksadul Alam
Dr. Debasish Kumar Kundu
Dr. Sumera Ahsan
Muhammad Rakibul Hasan Khan
Rayhan Ara Zaman
Jarin Akther
Dr. Mir Abu Saleh Shamsuddin
Siddique Belal
Uma Bhattacharjee
Muhommod Nijam
Sanjida Ara
Editors
Abul Momen
Professor Dr. Aksadul Alam
Translated by
Sanzida Tasmeen Khan Chowdhury
Md. Habibur Rahman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh
 
1 
                                                           
 
 
 
Teachers ’ Guide  
History and Social Science  
Class - Six 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                         
  
2 
 General Instructions  
Textbook Familiarity:   Provide guidance and support to students in understanding and performing the 
activities related to textbook familiarity, even if not explicitly mentioned in the Teachers’ Guide.  
Teamwork Management:  Provide instructions for the formation of teams comprising  5-6 students for 
teamwork. During team formation, ensure that each team consists of different students with diverse 
learning experiences. Avoid forming the same team repeatedly. Pay attention to ensuring a mix of 
skilled and insightful students in each te am. Maintain coordination among students proficient in various 
tasks within the team. Set goals and ensure that the same group of students does not repeatedly present 
team tasks. Ensure that every student gets an opportunity to participate in presenting va rious team tasks 
in class. After each team presentation, ask students several relevant questions to gather opinions and 
feedback. This will encourage students to listen to presentations from other teams with interest and 
cooperation.  
Individual Task Manag ement:  Grant students the independence to complete individual tasks on their 
own. Emphasize the goal of allowing students  to perform the task without any form of assistance. When 
necessary, inquire from the student about the progress of the task and whethe r any assistance is required.  
 
Research Task Management:  Before managing research tasks, seek permission from the relevant 
authorities if required. Ensure obtaining permission from the data provider regarding information from 
students. Prioritize the safety of students during research. Plan carefully about the subject matter, 
considering the highest attention to student safety.  
 
Field Trip or Site Visit:  With permission from the relevant authorities, manage field trips or site visits. 
Pay utmost attent ion to the safety of students. Plan how the task of site visit will be carried out 
considering the number of students and the actual conditions of the site. Plan and complete the work 
related to this subject at least one week before the designated day. See k assistance from school 
authorities if needed.  
Special Considerations:  In the school, there may be students with special needs representing different 
religions, castes, genders, and ethnicities. Demonstrate respectful and tolerant behavior towards 
everyon e. Additionally, be attentive and supportive towards students with special needs, providing 
necessary assistance and understanding.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
                           
  
3 
 Content s 
Name of Learning 
Experience          Competency               Page  
MY different Identity  6.2 1-12 
Looking Around through the 
Lens of Science  6.1 13-24 
1.Ways of Knowing History  
2. Influence of Landform on 
the History of the Bengal 
Region  
3. Influence of Landform on 
South Asian and World History  
4. The Emergence of 
Independent Bangladesh in the 
Bengal  
Region after a Journey of 
Millennia  6.3 
6.5 25-29 
Nature Conservation Activity  Part of 6.7  30-32 
Muktijuddha in Our Locality  
Book Reading Program  6.4 33-41 
Natural and Social Structures  6.5 and 6.6  42-53 
The interrelation between 
natural and social structures, 
and 
our responsibilities  6.7 54- 63 
Society and Resources  6.8 64- 67 
                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
  
4 
 My different identity  
 
Grade -based competency : Containing self -identity  considering the Geograph ical, Social , 
Cultural and, Politic al, background and exhibit responsible behavior accordingly.  
Number of sessions : 15                                                                               Work ing Hours: 10 hours   
Description of the Task   
In this learning experience, students will  first understand their self -identity and establis h connections 
or differences with others. Then, they will create a profile of famous personalities . Based on the 
experience they will present their personal identity. Exploring different pattern of social politic al, 
cultural and geographic background t hey will arrange self -identity fair. Finally , they will determine 
their responsibilities towards themselves and others based on the acquired knowledge.  
 The students will undertake various activities in different st ages of the experiential learning cycle. 
The following are the actions to be carried out in each step:  
 
                                                                                     
                                DIAGRAM  
 
 
 
• 1.Concrete experience :  Determining their own identity students will search for the 
similarities and dissimilarities.  
• 2 Reflective observations : Students will analyze and assess similarities and differences in 
self-identity  in various environmental, social, cultural and politica l perspective  
• 3.Abstract Conceptualization : They  will understand the responsibilities towards humanity 
through responsible  conduct in the diverse aspects of self -identity  
• 4. Active Experimentation : Arranging self -identity fair students will celebrate their self -
identity and determine their responsibilities towards one another  
 
Session 1: Description of Self -Identity  
In this session, the club will welcome students to History and Social Science class. Amidst very 
cordial and joyous environment, we will  arrange a reception for them.  Often, in the initial days of the 
academic year, new students may find it challenging to familiarize themselves with their peers. In 
such a n unfamiliar  environment, they start discovering one another in their own way. Therefo re, 
students will be en gaged in different activities  to interact and get to know one another, aiming to 
create a friendly relation and supportive atmosphere . 
Activities in this session:  
 Initially, each student will assist another student by handing them a piece of paper.  
 Next , they will be instructed to write information about themselves that is not easily 
discernible from appearances alone. The aim is for each student to gather information that 
goes beyond primary understanding.  
 Once the writing is complet e, students will collect all the papers, keeping them confidential, 
and later read the descriptions to the class. Each student will then identify themselves based 
on the information presented, creating an opportunity for others to guess who they are.   
5 
  Students will mark each other with symbols or signs to recognize similar preferences.   It is 
natural that they will identify more than one.  This will help them discover commonalities and 
build connections.  Again , through this activity they will come to know the information about 
their classmate which othe rwise would take  a reasonable period of  time.  
 In the first session it will not be possible to read out the identity cards of all the students 
within the given time frame. Therefore, this activity can be done at the beginning of each 
class during this lesson.  
Who am I?  
Now I shall explain that the purpose of the activity we have done so far is to reveal our 
identity. You have certainly observe d that we tried to establish our own identity through 
various activit ies under different circumstances. A person showcases their identity through 
diverse subjects and in different situations. These are just part of our self-identity . In this way 
the self-identity  of an individual,  a society and a nation develops. Do you wan t to know how 
our self-identity  developed ? Like a journey we will be continuing it throughout the academic 
year with many fun activities . We shall learn how human being led their life fighting against 
nature in ancient time, contributed to the development of civilization  with the progress of 
time.  They build family, society, rules and laws , state as well.  
 
 
We shall also see, because of differences of geographic environment many varieties have been 
created.   And all of these have contribut ed to the completion of self-identity  of the people of 
this land.  Let us start our adventure .  
 Now we shall write the word ‘self-identity ’ on the board  and invite the students to explain the 
word from their own point of view . Teacher will summarize their e xplanation and spell out 
that self -identity is to answer the question “Who am I ”. Whatever the students have written so 
far, is a part of their self -identity. Tell the students that to understand the concept deeply and 
elaborately we shall do many fun acti vities step by step.  
Sessions 2 -3: Creating a Profile of Famous Personalities  
 Students have now acquired the skill for identifying the fundamental elements of self -identity. 
Now they will do the following activities as assignment and we shall assist them.  
 In groups they will make the profile of some great  personalities  of Bangladesh and the world 
around , such as Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Begum Rokeya, and Sir Isaac 
Newton.  They may select Rabindranath Tagore or Kazi Nazrul Islam , though it is no t covered  
in the text book.  
 Students will read the biographies provided in the books and, if desired, gather information 
from other sources to create profiles of these famous individuals.  In the classroom first they 
will read the biography of Bangabandhu She ikh Mujibur Rahaman and make a profile. Then 
they will practice selecting famous personalities. Students will be provided all out help.  
 This practice activity will be continuing in two sessions and beside the class activity students 
will prepare profiles o f famous personalities and their own as an assignment.  
Sessions 5 -6: Creating a Personal Profile  
 As a continuation of    the previous sessions, students will work on creating a personal profile 
that includes elements of personal identity . Students will com plete the profile and answer 
related questions.  
 The aim is to make students aware that self -identity is not only centered around one or two 
aspects but is a multifaceted and individualized process. By engaging in these activities, 
students will gain a deep er understanding of self -identity  and explore different dimensions of 
6 
 personal identity .  Teacher will explain the point that it is natural to have different identities 
and despite th e differences one person can become very good friend of another .  
 After completing their individual profiles, students will present them in front of the entire 
class.  
 
Session 7:  Social Identity  
 Instruct the students to read the passage on the ‘Girls participated in Under 19 SAF football ’. 
Discuss how even though there may be differences in their personal development, they all 
contribute to the social development of Bangladesh. All of them are Bangladeshi. So , despite 
the diversity of identity based on culture, politics and geography , we are all citizen of 
Bangladesh.  
The s ession aims to highlight the unity in diversity and promote mutual understanding and 
respect among students with different cultural backgrounds.  
Session 8: Our Ethnic Identity  
Introduce students with the different ethnic groups. With a view to explaining t he cultural and 
linguistic diversity quiz competition will be arranged in enjoyable environment. Emphasis will be 
given on creating respect and love among the students for other language and culture.  
Session 9:  
Use of maps and differences between map and picture  
In this session the students will understand what  a map is and the significance of a map in finding  
roads and directions . They will be able to discern the differences between maps and pictures . For 
collaborative work, the following questions are pr oposed:  
 Shall ask whether the students  have ever lost their way? How do people know an area when 
visiting for the first time? If someone gets lost , how can he return to his address etc.  
 Students will answer from their experience  
 Next , Teacher will show some p ictures  and maps (in order to show the difference between 
maps and photos)  
 Students will find out the differences (in group) and understand the significance the of map.  
Question s for Group Activity : 
What do you see in the 1st and 2 nd picture?  
What differences can be observed between the two pictures?  
 
 
 Elements  of the first picture   Elements  of the second picture  
 
Sketches of natural scene ry of Bangladesh  Map of Bangladesh  
 
Trees, plants, rivers  Scale, direction etc.  
 
  
 
Session 10: Exploring Map Scale through Story Reading and Practice directly  
 To understand the concept of map scale, students will read stories from their textbooks related 
to “King’s stable”  
7 
  The students will then be divided into groups and given tasks to  measure the length and width 
of the classroom using a ruler (applicable parts will be specified).  They  will mark the 
measurements on the board and write explanations for each measurement.  
 All the students will be asked to draw the map of the classroom in the note book. Through 
group discussions, they will decide h ow they can  measure the length and width of a large 
classroom .  If we adjust the scale slightly while measuring, what happens?  
 Questions for Group activity  
 How to draw  a large classroom accurately on the board, keeping the scale accurate? Imagine 
if we slightly adjust the scale, what would happen?  
 During drawing map of place, it can be drawn in small size.  Students should only men tion the 
measurement. For example: 1c.m. = 1mitre  
 All the students will draw the map of their classroom in group. After drawing they will hang it 
on the wall.  
 Every student will draw the map of their way from home to school.  And submit as a home 
work.  
Session 11: Group Discussion  on large and small scale Maps : 
In this session, students will learn to work on different characteristics of maps  and will be able to use 
large - and small -scale map . In addition, they will understand the advantages of different versions.   
We will show two maps from History and Social Science book, the first one is of Bangladesh and the 
second one is of Chattogram Division . Students will observe the map in groups. Every group will find 
out the main landforms of Chattogram and writ e it down. Then they will present it. Teacher will ask 
about the experience of the task and want to know which map was easy to read and understand.   
Questions for facilitating Group Activity  
 Tell me which map was easier to study land type of Chattogram and  Why?  
 It becomes easier if you enlarge a bit when  you want to study a particular area clearly as we 
zoom when we get any photos or writing small in the cell phone  
 Through discussion students will be able to learn that it is easier to work exclusively with  the 
map of Chattogram than to work with the map of Bangladesh. Here we can highlight many 
subtle things. Say good bye to the students declaring that we shall play ‘Finding the hidden 
treasure ’ in the next class . 
 Session 12: Drawing Hidden Treasures on the Map and Treasure Hunt  
In this session, students will engage in a group activity where they'll draw maps of different sections 
of the school and mark hidden treasures on them. The teams will then exchange maps and embark on 
a treasure hunt to find the hidden treasures.  
Session Activities:  
In the first stage d ivide the students into four teams, assigning each team a specific section of the 
school to draw a treasure map.  For example , one group will cover the area from classroom to 
playground and second gro up can take the area from playground to the library. In this way four 
different maps will be drawn in groups.  
Second stage:  Each team will use their creativity to draw a map of their assigned area, marking hidden 
treasures with symbols or clues.  
Thirdly, Treasure Exchange: Teams will exchange their maps with another team, ensuring that each 
team has a different map from the one they drew.  
8 
 In the Fourth stage Treasure Hunt: Teams will use the exchanged maps to find the hidden treasures in 
other sections of t he school. The team that discovers the treasure first will be declared the winner.  
Session 13: Mapping Personal Journeys and Identifying Locations  
In this session, students will reflect on their personal journeys by marking significant locations where 
they have been or wish to go. Using different colors, they will create a map that represents their 
travels within their community.  Next , they will write down  on circle shaped paper  starting from the 
continent gradually to own country,  division, district,  regio n and in the smallest paper the address of 
their home . It will facilitate their understanding of geographical identity.   
Session Activities:  
  Students will first identify and mark places they have visited or want to visit on a map, 
starting from their hom es. 
  Using distinct colors, students will mark the places based on their preferences, like - the place 
they want to visit but have not visited yet.  
 Now taking help from the senior members of the family and gathering information from the 
other sources they will mark the spot more clearly. They will mark this family travel map with 
three distinct colours.  
 It will encourage reflection on personal experiences and connections to geography.  
 Each student will take six circle shaped chart paper  
 In the biggest circl e they will mark their own continent and, in this way, gradually own 
country, division, district area and in the smallest one address of their own house.  
 Now we shall inform them that through all these activities the identity you have known is 
called geogr aphical identity. The write down the word, “Geographical identity ” on the board.  
 Then let's say, imagine you are in a specific house - a small house by the side of a road or 
alley, or maybe a flat in a tall building. But your connection happens with the entire world. 
The is very interesting  - isn't it?  
Sessions 14 -15: Self -Identity  Fair  
In these sessions,  I shall assist the students to make them engage d in a self -exploration fair where they 
will present their interests, skills, and achievements. Forming teams and creating stalls with various 
themes, students will showcase their talents  and share insights about their personalit ies. I shall ask 
them to form teams of 5 -6 members each. Each team will choose a theme for their stall based on 
individual interests and talents (e.g., art, science, literature, sports).  
1. Food  
2. Clothing  
3. Accom modation  
4. Occupation  
5. Entertainment  
6. Customs and Festivals  
7. Culture  
 
 We shall put special attention as to ensure that student can express their personal identity th rough 
these themes.  
At the end of the fair students will discuss about the expected behavior to personal identity and 
identity of others. Their points of discussion shall be written down in the table given in the text book.  
  
9 
 Things to do for self -identity   
  
  
  
  
 
At the end of the exploration sessions, students will engage in a collaborative activity where they 
create a visual representation or collage reflecting the collective diversity within the class. This 
activity aims to celebrate individuality and unity within the group.  
 
Active Citizen Club  
 
Number of sessions : 2                                                                 Working Hour : 1hour 30 minutes  
                                                                                                                                  
We are the citizen s of Banglad esh. As a citizen of the country, we have certain responsibilities to 
uphold. These responsibilities contribute to maintaining discipline in the country and fostering  
harmony  among people. Through the Active Citizen  Club, we aim to educate students on the various 
responsibilities they can take on within their community. We will encourage them to engage in 
activities that can contribute to the development of a global citizen and create empathy, care and 
cooperation for the citizen of any country of the world . 
 The learning experience mentioned here is part of competency  6.2. Therefore, a detailed instructional 
cycle has not been provided.  
We shall  announce  before that , in the upcoming session, we will engage in playing football on the 
field so that it create s an enthusiastic and motivating environment.  
Tasks for this session:  
 Utilize the first 20 minutes of the session for team leader selection and team formation. The 
remaining time will be allocated, with the first 15 minutes for playing without rules and t he 
last 15 minutes for playing with rules.  
 Ensure that all students in the class are actively involved in the process. Then, invite them to 
propose names for two team leaders. If more than two names are proposed, inquire about how 
to choose between them.  
 Students may present various proposals. These proposals will be written on the board. Please 
ensure that if anyone intends to propose names for team leaders through a vote, it should be 
documented on the board.  After that, invite th em to decide through disc ussion which method 
they will follow in order to  select team leaders . If they choose  any weak system weigh the 
pros and cons  and try to make a favorable atmosphere to take the system of voting, make sure 
the voting  is fair and unbiased.  
 Following this, stu dents will independently take charge of the entire process of team leader 
selection  through voting . We will observe and provide assistance only when necessary.  
 Once the team leaders are chosen, they will select their team members from among the 
students. Through open discussion we will guide them to maintain  diversity in their 
selections, considering factors such as gender, background, and abilities,  to ensure  students ’ 
10 
 involvement in sports and sports related activity.  Also ensure inclusion of students of both 
genders if it is a coeducation institution.  
 Guide the students to the sports field or playing area. Inform them that today's game will be 
played in an inno vative way without any specific rules. However, emphasize that no one 
should intentionally hurt others. Proceed to name and lead both teams to the playing area.  
 For those who may not directly participate in the game, involve them in various activities 
related to the game, such as managing equipment, providing support, maintaining discipline, 
decorating the field, etc. Ensure that both boys and girls are actively included in these roles to 
maintain balance.  
 Make sure that no one is playing following the rule s. Consequently, a haphazard condition 
will be created. It will make the situation chaotic and funny. Now ask them to stop playing.   
However, ensure that safety measures are maintained.  
 Now, instruct both teams to play the remaining part of the gam e follow ing the rules . 
Session 1 -2 
In this session, students will reflect on the previous football game session and realize the importance 
of adhering to rules for effective teamwork. To be a good citizen and to promote active participation 
in following rules in various aspects of life, they will establish an Active Ci tizen  Club dedicated to 
practicing and promoting rule adherence.  
Tasks for this session:  
Students who participated in the previous football game session will engage in open discussions to 
reflect on their experience. They will answer questions such as:  
 Did we enjoy playing football yesterday? How did it feel to play in two different ways?  
 Did any differences arise from playing without rules? If yes, what were those differences? 
Why do you think those differences occurred?  
 To facilitate the discussion, encourage students to share their thoughts on how the absence of 
rules creates differences in play and whether rules are necessary for a fair and enjoyable 
game.  
 If students can articulate that difference s arise due to the absence of rules and that playing 
without rules is not feasible, further explore the reasons. Pose questions like   
a. Do rules only exist in sports,  
b. Do we encounter rules in other areas of life?  
c. Can you think of instances where we observe r ules?    
d. What challenges we face if there are no rules?    
e. Students will search for the answer to these question in small groups of 5 -6 members.  
Based on the findings , students will do oral presentation. We shall make a list of the outcome 
of their activity. Student will reflect on the significance of rules and adherence to rules. Also 
realize importance of rules everywhere from classroom, school, family, society to sta te. 
 Ask the students whether they want to set some rules to be followed in the classroom, school 
and in the society , Discuss the objectives, emphasi zing its benefit . Encourage them to create a 
list of rules to share with the class. Through open discussion,  formulate several rules for 
maintaining discipline in the classroom, the school, and in society. All the rules of the team 
will be consolidated and communicated through the discussion for implementation in 
classrooms, colleges, and for soci al places , foll owing three  distinct  list of  rules  for each 
context . All these rules will be followed by both students and teachers. If any new rule is 
added, it will be incorporated through open discussion in the classroom. Similarly, if any rule 
becomes obsolete, it wil l be discarded. As long as they are in the classroom, they will 
continue to follow and adhere to these rules and any amendments.  
11 
  In this phase, through open discussion, students will be encouraged to understand the 
importance of adhering to rules in vario us contexts outside the school, in society, and in the 
state. I will ask students questions, such as, " Can we accomplish such a significant task like 
upholding rules actively in maintaining discipline in the community, society, and the nation  
individually ?" 
 Upon receiving their responses, I will further inquire about how we can work to actively build 
a culture of adherence to rules. If they suggest that by working together, we can better 
maintain discipline, then I will propose the idea of forming a club de dicated to discussing and 
implementing rules through the medium of open discussion, where everyone can contribute to 
the tasks.  
 Once the decision to form the club is made, I will inquire about the specific tasks the club will 
undertake.  
  Following that, I will suggest that, based on the lessons from the textbooks of History  and 
Social S cience , the pictures can be analyzed through discussion to discuss which rules to 
follow and which to break.  
 After discussing the pictures, I will conclude by stating that th ese are not just traffic 
rules but also guidelines for various fields of work. I will propose dividing ourselves 
into groups of 5/6 people to form clubs in our active citizenship club, each responsible 
for presenting their own set of rules. The final decis ions about the tasks of the club will 
be made by the students through open discussion gaining consensus and agreement 
from everyone.  
 After determining what tasks,  they will perform, let's now establish a committee in 
the club to carry out these tasks efficiently. Students will sit in groups to discuss the 
committee's details:  
1.  Total Number of committee members.  
2. Designation or roles each member will have.  
3. Specific t asks assigned to each member.   
4. Who can become a general member.  
5. Duties and responsibilities of general members .  
 
 Based on these considerations, students will formulate proposals and present them to 
the club. Together, through discussion and consensus, the y will create a general 
framework and organizational structure for the committee, ensuring its functionality 
and alignment with the guidance from the teachers of History and Social S cience . It 
must be ensured that the subject teacher of History and Social Science will be 
appointed as the Advisor.  
 They will also decide if they want to appoint an advisor for guidance and seek 
approval for the advisor's role based on consensus.  
 Subsequently, students will follow a procedure similar to a student council, creat ing 
the committee and making decisions about the date of first meeting and its future 
activities . 
 As the first task for the active citizenship club, the students will propose guidelines 
for safe commuting from home to school, addressing traffic laws in urb an areas and 
suggesting safety measures for rural or suburban areas. These guidelines will be 
developed based on city traffic laws if the school is located in an urban area or rural 
safety measures if the school is in a village or suburban area. The club w ill ensure 
safe commuting practices for all students, and the guidelines will be disseminated for 
implementation on a yearly basis.  By the end of this session, students should have a 
deeper understanding of the importance of rules and their applicability b eyond sports, 
as well as the initiation of the Active Citizen Club to promote rule adherence.  
12 
        Looking around through the lens of science  
 
Grade -based Competency  6.1:  Be able  to observe and analyze changes in social structures 
and their elements considering time and geographical position . 
 
Number of sessions : 16                                                                Working Hours: 11 hours  
Description of the Task  
In this learning experience, students will initially determine the changes in the social and 
natural elements of their own area. After that, by researching various social and natural 
elements over time in their local past and present, they will identify changes using scientific 
methods. Students will utilize their knowledge and s kills gained through the research process 
to collect, analyze, and present various information for future learning experiences.  
Students will follow different steps in the teaching -learning  cycle based on the knowledge 
acquired in the iterative process.  
DIAGRAM  
1. Contextual experience: Determine the changes of social and natural elements  
2. Reflective observation: Students will search for change of social and natural 
elements following scientific method  
3. Abstract conceptualization:  Students will understand the si gnificance of finding 
information through scientific method.  
4. Active experimentation:  Students will search for information applying scientific 
method in their next learning experiences . 
 
Session -1: In the research task, students will explore the connection  
between education and real -life experiences.  
Before directly involving students in the research process, it is essential to understand the 
types of research -related activities in their own lives and what experiences they have in those 
activities. Knowing what they have experienced and why they have engaged in those 
activities will help shed light on their motivations. Thus,  student will understand that it is 
nothing exclusively new, in some way or other we are acquainted with this process.  
Establishing a connection to their life shall make them more enthusiastic.   
From the History and Social Science textbook, let's compare two pictures depicting the 
Burigonga  River before and after the current situation.  
Questions :  
a) What is present in bo th pictures?  
b) Is there any difference?  
 c) What do you think about it, and why is this difference ? 
13 
  d) Which picture is recent and which one is older?  Let's discuss these pictures in class. 
Perhaps the teacher will show us more pictures.  
 After this, st udents will see more pictures from the History and Social Science 
textbook.  
 
We may ask the following questions after showing some more pictures:  
 There are two pictures of the river Burigonga? What can you see in the 
pictures?  
 Do you see any similarities? If so, what are those?  
 Do you see any differences? If so , what are those?  
If the issue of changes in communication system arises  from the answer of the students,  then the 
teacher may ask  
Which picture is the latest and which one looks older? Why?  
 If the students fail to recognize the difference, we shall ask more questions to highlight the 
changes. And if the students can spot the differences, we would like to know from them  
An important concept of the subject History and Social Science is change. From th e sixth Grade to the 
subsequent grades, they will be inquiring about various kinds of natural and social changes of 
different countries and regions. For this reason , we want our students to be curious about changes and 
observe and think about the changes i n their surroundings . It is significant for research following 
scientific method.   Students will be given some individual tasks as a part of it.  
Now, let's explore what changes the students have observed in their locality. If they cannot identify 
any chang es, we will ask additional questions to clarify the issue. If students can clearly identify 
changes, we will ask them questions like:  
 Changes can be of different kinds ! Diverse and varied ! 
 Some changes are natural, some are social  
 Some changes are very rap id and some are rather slow  
 People make some changes by themselves but there are some changes beyond our 
control  
 We like some changes but we may not like some other  
 
Session 2: Area -specific inquiry  project -1 
Students will carry out research projects based  on different aspects such as food, clothing, housing, 
transportation, environmental changes, and agriculture in their local area. They will follow the steps 
below. We will always support them in this endeavor.  
Create inquiry questions:  
Research starts basically from questions that we usually answer following scientific method. Inquiry 
questions must have the following characteristics:  
1. Questions that are unknown and require information and analysis. For example, instead of 
asking how a br idge or dam was built in the area, a better question would be how people used 
to travel before and how they do it now.  
14 
 2. Make the question interesting for students. Otherwise, they may lose interest in the research. 
Remember that what may seem funny or trivi al to us can be important and amusing to 
students.  
3. To get the answers, we need to go to someone, go somewhere, or do something (read a book, 
listen to someone, visit a museum , observe the area, etc.). This will be clear from the question 
itself.  If the que stion is very complex and extensive, it will not be possible to answer it.  For 
example, instead  of asking what sort of changes have occurred in  the life of the people of our 
locality , we can make questions on the food habit, cultivation system, houses and structures  
etc. 
4. We must consider whether it is possible to do things they require  in order to get the answers . 
The questions should be avoided which necessitates going far away, and purchasing  
expensive materials and being engaged in risky tasks.  
5. Students should complete the inquiry tasks within s pecified  time. By following these steps, 
students shall have to gain a better understanding of all the steps of research so that they can 
utilize this experience in the next learning . Therefore , their entire assignment of question on 
“Change ” should not take more than one week  including the presentation time.  
When preparing their questions, guide them to select appropriate questions based on the following 
table  to facilitate research. When each team d ecides on a single inquiry  question, if it is found that the 
question is not suitable, they should either modify it or seek help in selecting another appropriate 
question. Pay attention to the diverse areas so that questions are formulated considering vari ous 
perspectives.  
Are the questions appropriate for inquiry ? Let us examine (Put √/×) 
Question  Do not 
know the 
answer yet  Interested to 
know the 
answer  Understand 
what to know , 
where to go  It is feasible 
to get 
/collect the 
answer  It is possible to 
get the  answer 
within the given 
time 
1      
2      
3      
4      
 
Session 3—4 Preparation for research Plan  
Afterwards, the students will select questions and explore probable answers through team discussions. 
They will develop practical and easy -to-implement ideas and work accordingly. This process will be 
carried out in two parts. In the first part, students will plan for  information  collection , and in the 
second part, they wi ll analyze the collected information in detail.  
They may use the following table for the planning of initial stage inquiry . (This is just a model we can 
prepare and use any other table that will serve our purpose)  
Name of the Team : 
Name of the Members : 
15 
 1. Questions for inquiry : 
2. The Key Concepts of the question : 
3. Where can we get properly the answers  to these questions  
4. What sort of question should be asked? What observation/image/evidence/information from 
printed source are required?  
Students will present using  poster paper  
Steps of Inquiry  Criteria for analysis  
1.Formulate questions for inquiry  -challenging  
-implementable  
-be prove n based on evidence  
-specific  
2. Key Concepts  -there might  be the highest two topics in the question  
-the topic should be specific for collecting information  
3.Where to go, who to ask  -source must be appropriate and reliable  
-accessibility of source is important  
4.What sort of question should be 
asked? What 
observation/image/evidence/information 
from printed source are required?  
 -use of the most appropriate material in information 
collection  
-questionnaire must be easy and reasonable in number  
-there must be a d efinite plan if the observation is to be 
recorded, like - checklist, video, field note etc.  
 
 To further facilitate understanding of the subject among students, the teacher will use the 
following table of  analysis of the plan:  
 Explain the method of obtainin g permission from the data provider.  
 Clarify the four -phase analysis table . 
Sessions 5 to 7:  
 In these three sessions, utilizing the plan developed in previous classes, students will gather 
information. In each step, we will collaborate with them in the be st possible way.  
Information Gathering:  
 Before finalizing the plan, each team will adopt previously mentioned methods to gather 
information.  
 In the data collection process, students will engage with parents, volunteers, senior students, 
and others voluntar ily. 
Sessions 8 to 9:  
In these two sessions, students will analyze the gathered information. We will guide them on how to 
collaboratively analyze information using various steps in information analysis.  
Information Analysis:  
 Students will organize acquired information in a way that helps them find answers to their 
research questions.  Descriptive  information , information obtained from interviews, and data 
related to key concepts will be analyzed based on the four -phase analysis table. 
 In addition to straightforward numerical data, students will use sub -categorization techniques 
(such as  addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  division,  ratios, percentages, averages, 
sequential arrangements, etc.) to answer questions in a straightforward manner.  
16 
  At this  stage, we will help students  to connect the concepts involved in their project through 
various steps in the analysis process, such as data sources, tools for data collection, data 
analysis, decision -making, and report preparation. By adhering to this syst ematic approach, 
we aim to simplify the data analysis process for students and make it more accessible for 
better comprehension.  
 After collecting information, they may not get the answers directly from it. So , help and direct 
every team to arrange the info rmation in order to get the best of it. Fo r example , to gather 
information and find the answers of the main questions from interview, descriptive 
information  
by using table, finding percentage or average. We shall try to keep information analysis 
simple.  
Session 10 to 12  
Every team will present their project in these three sessions  
We shall evaluate after their Presentation using the table. Students will also do self -evaluation using 
the provided  table.  
Presentation  
The selected group will present their group activity report mentioning and analyzing the research 
process. They will use various media such as written report, PowerPoint, infographics, model Flip 
chart, Documentary, drama, Cultural activity, Painting, Photography Comics etcetera. They may use 
any other relevant things if they are interested. We shall ask relevant questions during the 
presentation. This interactive approach will help all to explore and understand the steps of scientific 
research.  
Name of the Team : 
Name of the Members:  
1. Inquiry  Question  
2. Key Concepts  
3. Source of Information  
4. Elements for collecting Information  
5. Taking permission from the information provider  
6. Method of analyzing data  
7. Taking decision  
Shall facilitate every group to think regarding their own activity after the presentatio n so that they can 
evaluate their performance  
1. What activity did I do ? 
-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - 
2. How did I feel while doing it?  
- - - - -- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - 
3.Did I encounter any challenge? If so , how did I solve it?  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  
17 
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  
Problem I faced  The way I solved  To do in future  
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
4.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - (You may add some more questions that you 
think may help in analyzing your activity)  
 Now, we will divide the students into several teams and guide them in conducting research by 
exploring the library, the internet, and books. To clarify the process, we will assist them in 
understanding whether this is a task of a researcher.  
 Afterward, we shall give the students to explain the concepts like scientific res earch method, 
steps of social research, information, source of information, methods and elements of 
collecting information, analyzing information, as assignment.  
 
Self-evaluation :  
According to the provided format, each student will conduct self-evaluation. In this context, 
encourage them to stay patient and enthusiastic about their research procedure for further gradual 
improvement. Suggest them to be careful to check if any steps have been missed out.  
    Evaluation  
                                                                     Self-evaluation  
        Steps in Scientific research                          Yes/No  
1. Selected the topic for inquiry   
2. Formulated specific questions   
3.  Found out the main topics from the questions   
4. Selected the  source of information   
5. Selected the material of collecting information   
6. Collected information   
7.  Analyzed the information   
18 
 8. Taken Decision   
 
Session - 13  
Reflection and Evaluation  
 Students will reflect in various steps , not only at the end of the research. In the ongoing 
research process, students will foster their thoughts and impressions in different stages. To 
facilitate this, they will individually maintain a comprehensive "Research Diary." This diary 
will include pe rsonal opinions, experiences, and what resonates with them throughout the 
entire research journey.  
Key Questions to Address in the Diary:  
1. What specific tasks have we undertaken as a team in this phase?  
2. What challenges did we encounter while performing thes e tasks, and how did we overcome 
them?  
3. Are there alternative approaches or unconventional methods we used for these tasks?  
4. Which task did I personally enjoy the most, and what made it particularly appealing?  
 Two dedicated sections can be maintained for the  journal and Teachers Guide . Collected 
information will be the basis  for preparing reports and presentations.  
 Each team will have the option to hang a poster in the classroom during the entire research 
activity . The importance of making meaningful questio ns will be emphasized for effective 
collaboration and problem -solving.  Teacher will encourage the students to find answers to 
these question in group discussion.  
Session -14 
 Examining the process of conducting inquiry  
 We will explain these steps to the students, and they can use various tools such as presentations, 
videos, or post ers to enhance their understanding. Now, the students will analyze the entire process of 
their work and mark these steps there. In addition t o the steps,  we will  also explain various important 
terms related to this, such information, data sources, etc., which the students will identify in their 
research process.  
 Reflection:  
 Conducting reflections at each step of the research process is crucial . This means that students 
should consider what they did at each step, why they did i f any challenges they faced, and 
how they overcame them. They should also reflect on what they learned from the process and 
if there are any new questions that arose. To d ocument this, students can maintain a diary or 
journal, which can be referred to as a reflection diary or journal.   They can  choose a  name  for 
it as well . They can make or buy the diary. In this diary, students can write down their 
thoughts, feelings, and experiences  individually though they will work in group.  This diary 
can be used in the similar kind of inquiry activity of other chapters, other subject even in next 
Grades.  
 
 Next each team will hang a poster where they will write down the problems,  they c ould not 
solve on their own . Teacher will suggest solution to these problems later on. Other students 
will be encouraged to assist to contribute in problem solving.  
 
 
19 
 Session 15 -16 
Deep Understanding of the steps of inquiry:  
 
 Additionally, each group will create a brief research journey poster. For this, students 
will use pictures from the history and social science textbooks depicting the steps of 
the research journey at different stations (images/p ictorials ).  
 Students will ask questions similar to the fo llowing: Even if the main steps of the 
research are different, can they be done in various ways (e.g., interviews, 
observations, etc.)? How can different types of information be obtained (e.g., 
numbers, texts, images, etc.)? How can information be analyzed  in different ways 
(e.g., arranging in order, averaging, proportion, description, or pattern recognition)? 
Through this process, students will gain an understanding of the research and how it 
can be approached and analyzed in various ways. Students will observe and study  
each group's poster, participating in discussions.  
Active Experimentation /Application  
To actively examine this research process, they will apply the  competencies of this learning 
experience on  various new topics within History and social science.  
Feedback:  
 Ensure that various paths are considered for information  collection and analysis, and even 
though they may approach different questions, all students have grasped the fundamental 
steps in every research.  
 At the beginnin g, when planning the steps, teacher does not need to mention the terms such as 
information, research, tools for data collection, data analysis, findings, or conclusions. At the 
end of their presentation, we shall  explain terms like research, scientific method, 
investigatio n, research steps, information, sources of information, methods of data collection, 
and data analysis through examples from their wor k. 
Peer Evaluation  
In the entire research project, how much a student is participating is something other students in the 
group can actually assess. Students might not be good at evaluating themselves as collaborative or 
peer learners. So, we need to guide them on what to do and encourage them properly for peer 
assessment. Each group will mark the level of competency  in their friends' books. They will do this 
through discussions within the group. Students should be told the purpose is to help friends do better 
work.  
Peer Learning evaluation Rubrics:  Table of Participation in Group Work  
 
Evaluation Field:  
Name: --------------------------------------------------  
Field of learning                                           Pattern of participation  
 Completely achieved  Partially achieved   My assistance is 
needed  
1.Raising Questions  Our friend asked more 
than three  challenging 
questions  Asked 2/1quastions  Our friend has 
problem with raising 
inquiry question  
20 
 2.Planning data 
collection  Our friend has played 
an important role in 
the planning of 
information collection,  
e.g.  identifying the 
source of information.  
Preparing material for 
data collection  Our friend has 
participated in data 
collection planning.  
Given his opinion.  More participation is 
expected in the future 
regarding information 
collection  
3.Collecting data  Our friend has 
participated in 
information c ollection  Our friend has assisted 
in note  taking even if 
he is not involved 
directly in information 
collection  We expect more 
assistance in 
information collection 
in future.  
4.Analyzing data     
5.taking decisions     
6.Rflection/     
7.Overall participation 
in the inquiry activity      
                                
                                           History  
 This learning experience is arranged with the combination of the following four 
chapters  
                                           Name of the Chapters: Ways to learn History  
                                      Influence on landform in the history of Bangla Region  
                             Influence on landform in the history of South As ia and the World  
                        Emergence of Independent Bangladesh after Millennia  in Bangla Region  
Grade -based competency 6.3: To be able to comprehend the pattern of historical changes by 
gathering historical information from social and cultural elements besides written sources.  
Competency 6.5: To search how social structures are formed based on geographical location 
and how they function in different times . 
Number of sessions :7                                                                       Working hour:5 hours  
Overall description of the Task:   
In this learning experience the students will search for the history of their own locality. They 
will understand from their search that , besides the historical source information can be 
gathe red from social and cultural elements. Afterward they will determine the geographical  
position  of their own locality taking information from different sources.  
Next , they will try to find how this geographical location plays role in forming the lifestyle o f 
the locality.  
The activities of the students  to be done in the different steps of the experiential learning 
cycle of teaching learning are given below:  
21 
 DIAGRAM  
1. Concrete  experience : Students will search for the history of their own locality R 
2. Reflective observation : They will understand from their search that, besides the 
historical  source information can be collected from social and cultural elements.  
3. Abstract conceptualization :  Students will take preparation to inquire about to 
determine the geographical position of their own locality taking information from 
socio cultural sources  Active experimentation  
4.  Students will inquire about the geographical position of own locality and  present the role of  
geographical location in the life style  of people  
 
Session 1 -3 Finding history of own neighborhood/locality/village  
Tasks to do in this Session  
 First, students will search for the history of the neighborhood/locality/village. For this , 
I shall suggest the students to do the task of ‘Finding history of own 
neighborhood/locality/village ’ from  the chapter  “The Ways of knowing History ” 
I shall ask the students to form group s of 5 to 6  selecting members living in  the same 
neighborhood/locality/village . As a source of the information to know the history of the 
locality I shall ask them to select 4 -5 senior citizens from the family and the locality.  
Students will collect information regarding the culture of the loca lity, structure of the family, 
customs, social system, special structure . They will be asked to prepare some questions  
through group discussion  for this task.  Some model questions are:  
1. How was the clothing pattern in the past?  
2. How was the food habit?    
3. Is there any ancient structure?  
4. Who built this Structure?  
5. How were the roads before?  
……………………………………………  
……………………………………………..  
 They will discuss and analyze the information obtained from the questions and 
present the findings.  
 After the students' presentation, explain to them that historical information can be 
obtained from various sources. Just as we find historical information from past books, 
evidence, documents, newspapers, we can also get historical information from various  
elements of the people used in the past, such as songs, pictures, structures, clothing, 
etc.  
Sessions 1 -4: Historical Research in the Bengal Region  
Tasks for this session:  
 Ask students to read '  The Ways of knowing History,' 'The Influence of Geography on 
the History of the Bengal Region,' and 'The Influence of Geography on the History of 
22 
 South Asia and the World.' Encourage them to read these at home. After students 
have finished reading, explain the following text to them.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Now I shall inform the students that the information we have heard  so far , are collected by the 
historians from different social and cultural elements besides the written one . We can learn 
geographical and social history of some areas from this social and cultural element. For an example 
we shall read out the lyrics of the following song:  
 
ভাওয াইয া  গান 
আস্তে চালান গাড  -রে গাড  য াল - 
ধীস্তে চালান গাড  ; 
ভাডি যায  র াে বুস্তেে পাঞ্জে- 
ছা  স্তে  বাস্তপে  বাড  -রে... 
আস্তে ধীস্তে চালান গাড  -রে... When we explore the historical context of the river -bound region of Bengal, we find distinct 
geographical features that define the boundaries of this region. In 1971, the eastern part of 
this Bengal region witnessed the victorious emergence o f an independent sovereign 
Bangladesh.  
The geographical position has significantly influenced the social life of the people in the Bengal 
region. Life patterns, such as fishing from rivers, thriving agricultural fields, and rich cattle 
farming, have played  a crucial role in shaping the lives of the people in Bengal. The lifestyle of 
the people in this region was distinct from any other region. Consequently, many rulers faced 
challenges in conquering this region. The unique geographical features, such as hea vy rainfall, 
deltaic landscapes, and dense forests, made it difficult for any ruler from other regions to 
establish a stronghold here.  This geographical environment not only presented challenges but 
also assisted in our struggle for independence during the  Liberation War. The freedom fighters 
utilized the rivers, aquatic terrains, and forests strategically, contributing to the defeat of the 
invading forces. The armed forces of Pakistan faced consecutive defeats, one after another, 
ultimately leading to the liberation of our beloved Bangladesh.  
 
There are many ways to learn ancient history. Two majors of them are written and unwritten sources. 
Among the written sources there are document, files, books, etcetera.  Of the unwritten sources there 
are soci al, cultural elements like human skeletons , bones and used utensils, weapon and the remnants 
of different structures etc. We can even learn about the history of human being when they did not 
learn to write taking inform ation from the soci al and cultural elements . 
23 
 ওস্তে ... 
 াও োস্তে র াে উথাল-পাথাল  
বাস্তপে  ফাস্তে ডিয া, .........  
আস্তে ধীস্তে চালান গাড  -রে... 
ওস্তে... 
নােীে জীবন এ ন জীবন 
ডবডধে িস্তোৎ গ  া, 
আপন  ানুষ পে েো খায  
পেস্তে  আপন েো-রে... 
আস্তে ধীস্তে চালান গাড  -রে...  
 
Now I shall ask which region of Bangladesh is represented in this song? How is the geography of that 
region? Let the students share their answer after discussion  in a group of 5 to 6. Analyzing the lyrics 
Students will find from the answers t aking help from different sources.  
 I shall explain that we can learn the history of an area from its different cultural elements 
such as songs, poem, plays etc. The lifestyle of the people of a locality depends on 
geographical location. For example , in thi s song river and agriculture fields are mentioned 
and these influences the family life,  custom and society of that area  
 Besides from socio cultural elements we can learn about any historical changes. Ask the 
students to listen to this song where the histor ical background of the Language Movement of 
1952 is highlighted.  
 
 
                                                                          হামার  ভাষা  হামার  গান 
-অন্তর  চন্দ্র 
 
বাাংলা  হামার  মায়ের  ভাষা  
বাাংলা  হামার  প্রাণ 
বা়োন্নর  রাজপযে  রযে  
দিযে  দনযজর  জান।। 
রদিক  শদিক  বরকত  আরও  
স ানারও  ভাই সবান  
মাওয়ের  ভাষা  বাাাাঁচবার  নাদগ  
হইযে  উচাটন  ।। (ভাইযর ) 
..... 
হামার  ভাষা  হামার  গান 
নাদ়ি  সপাতা টান 
 
 
Session 5 – 7:  Searching for the geographical position  of your own locality  
24 
  Shall ask the student to do the task of inquiry in the research task "The Impact of Geography 
on the History of the Bengal Region" under the theme "Our Surrounding Geographical 
Environment,  
 Shall instruct a group of 5 to 6 students to form a team. Ask them to generate questions based 
on three themes wit hin the team:  
 
1. Elements of the Geographical Environment  
2. The Influence of the Geographical Environment on Our Society and Culture  
3. Relevance of the Geographical Environment to the Occupations of People in Our Area  
 Guide them to follow the steps of the resear ch process for content identification.  
 For this, they should gather information from various sources, such as books, newspapers, 
maps, and different travel narratives. Emphasize the importance of reading relevant books to 
complement their research.  
 Additionally, encourage students to collect information from social and cultural elements, like 
studying the occupations, clothing, and festiv als of the region through observation.  
 
                         
  
25 
 Nature Conservation Activity  
 
Number of session s:2                                                Working hour: 1 hour 30 
minutes   
 
This will be considered as part of the learning competency "Natural and Social 
Linkages" under 6.7.  
Here, students will undertake some activities related to nature conser vation, which 
they will implement throughout the year at various times. These activities will be 
conducted through the Active Citizens Club. They may not necessarily be continuous 
but could be occasionally integrated into classes of other competencies so t hat the 
subject does not become monotonous for students.  
 
Conceptualize  Relationship between Wildlife and Environmental Destruction   
We are keen on engaging students in the conservation of wildlife and the 
environment. To instill a sense of responsibility regarding environmental pollution 
and the extinction of wildlife, students can be allowed to read age -appropriate 
informative maps, videos, or books. If none of these is available or accessible, you 
can show the students the images of some wildlife animals  below (they should 
definitely read the relevant section in the textbook about the Wildlife Conservation 
Club). Then, ask them:  
 
 How do you feel about these pictures of birds and animals?  
 In which countries can these animals be found?  
 What would happen  if these animals roam around us all the time ? 
I shall also add that it may never become true in any way because these animals are 
found nowhere in the country, all of them got extinct. Only a few days back they were 
available in different areas of Bangladesh.  Let us think of the peacock, they used to 
roam around in all the ‘Shall’ forest and other forests including Savar  like the crow 
and the martin just 100 years back . To ignite their curiosity,  I shall ask  
“Do you know why these beautiful birds  got extinct from our country ” 
If any student answer “Yes” I shall listen to him.  
Then instruct them to look at some more p ictures  from History and social science 
textbook  
I will ask you, what comes to your mind when you see these pictures? Assign one 
name for each picture and write it below the corresponding blank space in your 
textbook (students should not show or tell the names written under the pictures to 
each other. They should try to name the pictures based on the content of the pictures).  
 
Considering what is  shown in the pictures, can you  find any relationship with the 
extinction of wildlife? If your answer is yes, can you explain what kind of relationship 
has been established?  
 
Now, let's discuss - let's divide into groups and collectively find the answers t o these 
two questions. After that, students will be divided into small groups of 5/6. They will 
join one of the groups, and we will also join one of the groups to find the answers to 
26 
 their questions. Students will discuss in their groups for 10 minutes and  present the 
answers to the two questions in a group manner.  
           Nature Conservation Activity  
To find out the students' understanding of conservation initiatives, I would like to 
know:  
 
 Who are responsible for these  problems?  
  Who has the responsibilities to address the problems ? 
 
If students say that it is the responsibility of humans, I will then ask them:  
 
 Do we, (as human ) have a responsibility?  
 How can we contribute to wildlife and environmental conservation?  
 Can we work alone for such a big task as wildlife and environmental 
conservation?  
In the context of their answers, I will ask them how we can play a more significant 
role in wildlife and environmental conservation. If they agree that working together 
will have a greater imp act, I will encourage them to come up with some initiatives for 
wildlife and environmental conservation that can be implemented through active 
participation in a Citizen  club where everyone can work together.  
 
In this phase, students will be divided into groups based on the policy of inclusion, 
and they will read the story "Shyam oli" from their History and Social science book. 
After reading the story, they will discuss the following questions in their groups to 
find answers based on the story:  
 
 What proble ms did the students in the "Shyam oli" story identify in their area?  
 What did they do first in order to solve the problem?  
 What kind of initiatives did they take to solve the problem?  
         
After group presentation I shall ask what sort of task they want  to undertake.  
At this stage, students will once again be divided into groups of 5/6 and create a list of 
possible activities for nature and wildlife conservation. After completing the group work, 
each group will present their list using posters, papers, o r other mediums. During the 
presentation, all students will analyze the lists from each group collectively through 
discussions to generate a comprehensive list of feasible activities that the club members can 
implement individually or in groups throughout the year. The students will prioritize tasks 
based on their local realities and create a list of activities that align with the club's goals. A 
sample list of activities could be as follows, considering the environmental, ecological, and 
socio -economic asp ects: 
 
 Planting fruit and forest trees  
 Conservation of habitats for wild birds  
 Management of waste and cleanliness in the school and surrounding area  
27 
  Direct efforts to prevent deforestation and environmental degradation  
 Advocacy for wildlife conservation t hrough public awareness  
 Visiting and maintaining places with ecological diversity such as ponds, parks, 
forests, and hills  
 Providing shelter and caring for injured or orphaned wildlife  
 Responsible use of resources, like fuel and wood, and encouraging other s to do the 
same  
Afterward, I will ask the students if they would like to have an advisor who can guide them 
for the successful implementation of their activities, considering the advisory role can be 
beneficial for their progress and learning.  Advisor can  be appointed only after taking their 
consent.  
    
  
28 
 1.Muktijuddha in Our Locality  2. Book Reading 
Programme  
 
Grade -based Competency 6.4 : Understanding the contribution of the people of Bangladesh in 
the war of liberation by inquiring historical truth from written sources and from social and 
cultural elements.  
 
No. of Sessions: 11                                                                            Working Hours: 8 Hours  
Overall Working Concept :  
Students will design a project about Muktijuddha in their locality and implement it. They will 
conduct interviews with senior citizens and knowledgeable persons about their contributions 
considering the situations during Muktijuddha, incidents, notable places, and the contribution 
of a single person, family, and society. From this inquiry, they will understand how the 
ordinary people of the society became a different man by going beyond thei r self -interest and 
prioritizing the collective interests of the nation. Then, they will prepare a report by 
investigating the collected data. At the same time, they may decide to build a memorial at 
some significant historical sites. Therefore, the collec ted data/information can be 
stored/documented in any local or national institution for future research purposes.  
 
An experiential learning cycle about how the students will conduct their assigned work is 
given below.  
4. Active Testing:  
Students will take the necessary steps to 
record data and circulate the history of 
Muktijuddha.  1. Contextual Experience:  
Students will search for the history 
of Muktijuddha in their locality.  
 
3.  Abstract Conceptulization:  
Students will take the initiat ive and proper 
planning to document and disseminate the 
history of Muktijudddha.  2. Reflective Observation  
Students will be able to know the 
results and background of 
Muktijuddha by collecting data from 
different sources following scientific 
methods through a project.   
  
Session -1  
Step 1: Concepts of Investigative Project -based Learning  
 Students will conduct the investigative project on the role of common people in 
Muktijuddha following the steps of the project.  
 In project -based work, we usually do two things: first, we try to find practical 
solutions to a problem; second, we try to find answers to a challenging question 
through active investigation. We usually do these works for an extended period. Then, 
we share  the findings of the investigative study with the people concerned so that they 
might benefit.  
29 
  One thing to remember is that project -based work is not always centered around 
investigative tasks. In this learning experience, we will do an investigative stu dy. 
However, project -based work can also be preparing a model, creating something new, 
or providing a practical solution to a problem. For example, gardening, preparing a 
wall magazine, drawing a map of your locality, and preparing the models of Shahid 
Minar, the National Memorial, Buddha Vihar of Paharpur, and the solar system can be 
the objectives (goals) of a project -based work.  
 
 Step 2: Orientation/ Problem Identification  
 
 We may create an encouraging situation in the classroom where the students will 
decide the title of the project -based work on ordinary people's role in Muktijuddha. 
(This is an example only; we can create the same encouraging situation for open 
discussion. )   
 
a) How did our country become independent?  
b) Why did the liberation war take place? When did it happen? How long was the 
period of Muktijuddha?  
c) Who was the leader of Muktijuddha? How did it take place?  
d) Were the famous people only contributed to Muktijudd ha? Had ordinary people 
like us contributed?  
e) If yes, what kind of role did it play?  
Posing these types of questions in the classroom may create an encouraging situation for an 
open discussion. In this case, we may tell some heroic stories of ordinary peo ple who 
contributed to Muktijuddha. For example, we may read the following story narrated by a 
teacher. We may tell such stories from the numerous untold heroics of ordinary people.   
 
Shahid Azad ’s Story  
 
Many of you have heard the name of Shahid Azad. During Muktijuddha, Azad was a 
vibrant young soul. Despite his young age, he was a member of a crack platoon guerrilla 
group. They were never fearful to attack the Pakistani Army. In a phase of the war, Azad 
got caught. After many searches, Azad's mother learned that he had been detained at 
Ramna Police Station. She went there and saw that Azad was brutally tortured. He was 
tortured in such a way that he wasn't able to walk. After seeing her mother, Azad infor med 
her, "If he tells police about the other members of the guerrilla group, then only they will 
let him go." Azad's mother replies, "Even if you die, do not tell anything about others." 
Azad agreed. Azad starved for an extended period of time, and therefo re, he wanted to eat 
boiled rice. Upon her return with boiled rice, Azad's mother did not find him there. After 
that, Azad's mother was alive for 14 years, and since then, she didn't eat rice for a lifetime.  
 
This is the story of Azad. We have thousands o f Azad ’s and their unknown heroics around 
us. Don't we ever want to know their heroics and those of such mothers?  
 
…certainly, we will. However, the question is how? We do not have the documented 
history of our locality. Shall we be limited to our reading  of history found by others? Or 
Shall we find the history from the abyss of oblivion? How about if we add a new chapter in 
30 
 the history of Muktijuddha about the role of ordinary people in Muktijuddha in our 
locality?  
 
 
 
Session 2:  
 At the beginning of the session, we may ask the students, "What do they want to 
know about Muktijuddha from their locality? ” Students may ask many questions, for 
example, what happened? How did Pakistanis torture the ordinary people in our 
locality? What d id general people do? We will note the questions posed by the 
students. After discussion, we will select some fundamental questions whose answers 
will be sought by the students through the project. For example,  
1. During Muktijuddha, what kind of torture was conducted?  
2. During Muktijuddha, how did the ordinary people protest?  
3. During Muktijuddha, how did the ordinary people help Muktijoddhas?  
 In this phase, we can ask, did anyone of your family martyred during Muktijuddha? If 
we find anyone like this, we can share the incident with others.  
 Then, we may ask the students, "During Muktijuddha, what kinds of incidents took 
place? How and where did we know about the events? ” In reply, we may receive 
many answers; for example, we may know from the older people of t he society; we 
may receive information from textbooks, local libraries, newspapers of that time, and 
from different websites on the internet.  
 Then we may ask, “Are the sources of information reliable or not? How did we figure 
it out? The students will sha re their answers. If we verify the answers from multiple 
sources, we can emphasize that the answer is accepted.  
 Considering the people who are ignorant about these incidents, we may discuss what 
we can do to inform them. Receiving answers from the student s, we may align the 
project's objectives with this discussion.  
 Based on the discussion, we will logically arrange the steps considering how we will 
proceed, step by step, with the entire project. Then, show a road map on the board 
(Whiteboard/Blackboard/S martboard).  
Session 3:  
Step 3: Preparation (Team/Group Formation and Working Plan)  
In this phase, we will instruct the students to form groups and ask them how they want to 
form the team so that data collection becomes easy. Students who reside in a close 
geographical distance can be placed in the same group. Whatever opinions come up, w e will 
decide together through discussion. Students will form groups with equal members residing 
in the same locality. They have to decide each member's role and take the teacher's 
suggestions.  
 In every group, there may be 8 -10 members. The entire work wi ll proceed through 
group mode. After forming the group, every student must stay in the same group from 
the beginning till the end.  
31 
  Before starting this long project work, students must formulate a list of rules and 
regulations. Every member must agree to it. A sample is shared below, for example.  
Rules and regulations to  be followed :  
1. Students must be respectful of others' opinions; however, anyone can logically put 
his/her arguments.  
2.  Do not hesitate to express your opinion or point of view.  
3.  We should accept other's opinions only after logical analysis.  
4.  Ensure active participation in the group work.  
5.  Receiving/Getting prior permission from the interviewee.   
6.  ---------  
  
 According to the previous road map, every group must complete the assigned work 
within the stated time frame. We will help the students in each group with the steps 
related to the working plan through discussion.  
Sessions 4 to 5  
Step 4: Literature Review (Reviewing existing information or knowledge)  
 Though we have learned the fundamental steps of investigative study before, there 
was no mention of this step titled 'Literature Review.' Here, this step will be added. In 
the case of an investigative study, i f we have the knowledge of existing literature, then 
it will be easier for us to determine what data we need to collect. In this step, we will 
ask the students, "From where can we find the documented history of this locality?" 
In the next step, the student s will collect data directly through interviews. However, in 
this step, we will do a literature review. Students may provide instances of books, 
newspapers, documentaries, and legal documents as reliable sources of data. Then, we 
need to instruct them to l ist the probable sources. According to the list, they will 
collect data.  
 Every team will collect data according to the listed sources. After that, they will list 
the data sources and document the investigation process. Then, they will share the 
collected data with us.  
 For the smooth conduct of our investigation, we will read the chapter titled 
'Muktijuddha in our Locality' from the History and Social Science  Book before 
starting the investigation.  
                                                Book Reading Program me 
 As part of this session, we will instruct the students to list books through the Active 
Citizens Club. We will provide hands -on training on how to search for a book in a 
library, how to use it, the rules of using a library, and how to bor row books from a 
library.  
 At the end of the chapter titled 'Book Reading Program, ' learning experiences are 
added. However, according to the Teacher's Guidebook, we will help the students to 
conduct a 'Book Reading Program' through the Active Citizens Cl ub as part of the 
literature review on Muktijuddha.  
 From the very beginning of this lesson, students will clearly define the working 
method of the 'Book Reading Program' and prepare an annual working plan. We will 
provide the necessary guidance and help i n this regard.  
32 
  On the very first day of the lesson, we will take everyone to the library 
(School/Local/Police Station/District library (if any) and ensure everyone's 
membership. After that, we will teach them about the process of borrowing and 
returning b ooks. If there are no such libraries close to the school, then we will take the 
initiative to build up a library on the school premises (in a classroom) with the help of 
the Headmaster, Asst. Teachers and willing personnel of the locality as part of the 
book reading program. Besides, we will conduct a book reading program (at least one 
book) weekly or bi -weekly.   
 For these purposes, we may collaborate by maintaining official procedures with 
different organizations working to develop book -reading habits amo ng children.  
 The book reading program is related to every other subject. So, with proper 
consultation and coordination with other teachers, we may take the initiative to ensure 
students' presence in the library and allocate some class time for the book re ading 
club. If needed, we may take direct help from the Hea dteacher .  
 
Sessions 6 -7:  
Step 5: Investigation and Data Collection  
 This time, the students will collect data about the incidents related to Muktijuddha  in 
their locality from the older family members and neighbors. Each team will discuss 
and formulate a questionnaire (set of questions) for the interview purposes. 
Questionnaires work as an instrument of data collection. In a questionnaire, we 
prepare some  preset questions that we will ask at the time of the interview. We need to 
formulate the questions so that the answers will lead us to find the answers to the 
fundamental questions of this project.  
 We do not directly help them. Instead, we will supervise  the entire process of this 
step. Every member of the group will collect data from their family members. Then, 
all the members will sit together and discuss the collected data.  
 
Questionnaires for the Interview  
Fundamental Questions for 
Investigation  Questionnaire for the Interview  
1. During Muktijuddha, what 
kind of torture was 
conducted?  1. Where was your location during Muktijuddha?  
2. How old are you during Muktijuddha?  
3. To your knowledge, did the Pakistani Army enter 
your locality?  
4. If yes, what kind of torture was conducted?  
 
(According to the sample questions above, students 
can formulate necessary questions like this)  
 
5. …….  
6. …….  
7. …….  
33 
 2. During Muktijuddha, how 
did the ordinary people 
protest?  (According to the sample above, students c an 
formulate necessary questions like this)  
 
3. During Muktijuddha, how 
did the ordinary people 
help Muktijoddhas?  
 (According to the sample above, students can 
formulate necessary questions like this)  
 
Name of the Interviewer:  
 
Date:   
 
 They will share the findings. Then, every team will share at least one story from their 
collected data to the classroom.  
 After listening to the stories, we will try to list the names of different places 
mentioned in the story. Then, we will instruct the s tudents to do investigative work on 
those places. We will tell them to investigate, "Did the Pakistani army face any 
environmental obstacles (e.g., number of rivers, etc.) during Muktijuddha? ” Students 
will locate and visit those places. The group will dec ide, and after that, they will 
interview the witnesses and collect data by interviewing the country's senior citizens. 
Before starting the work, they should share their plan.  
 We will continuously follow up on their work and provide all kinds of institutio nal 
help to the students, if necessary. We should not impose our opinion. Instead, we will 
advise them. Moreover, we will provide technical (e.g., recorder, camera, etc.) and 
administrative (e.g., if special permission is needed to enter a particular place , then 
with consultation to the Headmaster, we may forward letters) help to the students.   
 Students will conduct interviews with senior citizens and knowledgeable persons in 
their locality about their contributions considering the situations during Muktij uddha, 
incidents, notable places, and the contribution of a single person, family, and society. 
They will try to learn about the real situation during Muktijuddha, the intra -
relationship of natural and social environment with Muktijuddha, the non -communal 
or secular environment, the intra -relationship between different festivals and the spirit 
of Muktijuddha, and relics of the war and related places. The group members will 
note the important information. Later, they will prepare a map using different symbol s 
to identify the places of the relics of war.  
 We will ensure the contribution and gradual participation of all the students.  
Session -8:  
Step 6: Verifying Information and Analysis  
 We will ask for the student's opinions or ideas on verifying the collecte d data's 
authenticity. We will give them the necessary instructions. We should not impose any 
opinion upon them.  
34 
  The students will verify the collected data and, after verification, either accept or 
discard them. Later, they will share their work experien ces in data collection, 
verifying information, and analysis before the entire class.  
Sessions 9 to 11:  
Step 7: Result Preparation and Presentation   
 We will ask every team, “How did they inform others about the collected stories they 
have found through investigation? ”  
 Upon discussion, they can formulate creative and innovative plans, such as photo 
books, documentaries, wall magazines, posters, leaflet s, photography, photo 
exhibitions, books, plays, etc. We should allow them complete freedom in this regard, 
and we will be aware of the probable challenges and issues. The groups will 
implement their plans with our suggestions and advice. Later, they will share it on a 
national day.  
 With the advice and feedback of the concerned teachers, the students will arrange a 
presentation ceremony on their project. The teachers at the school, Upazila Nirbahi 
Officer (UNO), Guardians, Local Senior Citizens, and Muktij uddhas, will be invited 
to join as guests in the program.  
 On any celebrated national day at school, for example, 7th March, 17th March - Father 
of the Nation ’s Birthday and National Children's Day, 25th March -Genocide Day, 26th 
March -Independence Day, 14th April - First Day of Bangla New Year (Pahela 
Baishakh), 14th December - Martyred Intellectual Day, and 16th December - Victory 
Day, the students will present the final project in front of the teachers, students, 
guardians, and community representatives.  
Step-8: Initiatives to Preserve the Memories of Muktijuddha  
 Then, we will ask the students about the ways of preserving memories of Muktijuddha 
as a reflection of the results of the project, which may do the following. For example, 
Students can build a memori al of Muktijuddha; they can take initiatives to renew, 
preserve, or reconstruct the existing memorials of Muktijuddha; they can plan a new 
design or adopt proposals for implementation and ask for financial help from the 
school, local administration (Zilla or Upazilla) for the proper implementation of it.  
 
Step-9: Documentation  
 We will provide necessary guidance and feedback to the students to preserve the data 
and a brief project report. Then, the student will preserve the data collected at every 
step of t he project and write a document for self -reflection. Then, the students will 
institutionally preserve a summary of their learning experience 
(pictures/videos/written forms/drafts in the form of soft or hard copy) by taking our 
help.  
At the end of the less on, we will explain the assessment rubrics to the students so that they 
can assess the performance of the group members.   
 
                                              
35 
 Natural and social structures  
Competency 6.5: Be able to explore how social structures  develop and function differently in 
different time and geographical contexts.  
Competency 6.6: Be able to explore how the individual's position and role in society are 
determined by existing social and political structures.  
Number of Sessions: 14                                                                         Working Hours: 11 
Hours  
 
Description of the Overall Task  
To help students achieve this qualification, they will first discuss and present the structure 
and function of buildings and structures  from around the world, including Bangladesh, to 
build their understanding of "structure" in general. Then, they will do various tasks to 
understand first the natural structure and then the social structure and its various components. 
Finally, students wil l explore the various elements of the social structure of ancient societies 
through research and presentation in various ways.  
Below are the activities that students will undertake at different stages of the learning and 
teaching experiential cycle.  
1. Contextual Experience  
Students will get an idea of structure by looking at the pictures of different things they know.  
2. Reflective Observation  
Students will observe natural and social structures and determine their functions.  
3. Abstract Conceptualization  
Students will plan to explore past and present societies and cultures using scientific inquiry 
methods.  
4. Active Testing  
a. Students will identify changes in past and present social structures through inquiry.  
36 
 b. They will also determin e the position and role of family members and discuss the impact of 
social and state structure on it.  
Session 1: Group Work and Presentati on by Looking at Pictures  
In this session, we will show students pictures of houses and other structures from differe nt 
regions of the world, including Bangladesh, from history and social science textbooks. 
Students will work in groups with the pictures. They will observe and discuss different types 
of house/building structures, understand what type of house is used for what purpose, and 
how house structure can vary according to geography, climate, time, and use. Then, they will 
understand the structure of various objects and their relationship with functions.  
Our Roles in this Session  
We will first cordially exchange sk ills with the students and welcome them to the session. 
Then, we will tell the students that today, in groups, we will talk about houses and different 
structures (Igloo, Tabu, Japanese, Chinese, Cave, Greenhouse, Hospital, Prison, Factory, 
Mosque, Temple, Church, Pagoda, etc.) from different regions of the world and different 
periods. If we want, we can also collect relevant pictures from outside the textbook before the 
session and show them to the students during the session. Considering the number of stud ents 
in the class, help them to divide into groups of 5 -8. Students will divide into groups, look at 
the pictures given in the book, and discuss to find the answers to some questions.  
Serial  Question  Answer  
1. How do the houses or buildings look?   
2. What is it made of?   
3. What are the uses?   
4. What relation does it have with the 
weather or the environment? If so, 
what kind of relationship is there?  
  
5. Considering the usage of the building 
or houses, is there any difference in 
the structure of the buildings? If so,   
37 
 What kind of difference is there?  
 
 
The students will present the results of the discussion to everyone in groups. In this case, we 
have to instruct the students that if a previous group has already said a topic, then there is no 
need to repeat the same thing. We will help the students to make the following conclusions by 
summarizing the discussion:  
Students will conclude:  
Everything has a  structure or shape. Structures vary and change over time according to the 
location and use.  
At this stage, in order to broaden the students' understanding of structure and its function, we 
have studied some natural structures such as mountains, oceans, rivers, volcanoes, deserts, 
plateaus, forests, etc. We will assist the students to go through various activities in different 
stages to deepen the understanding on which the effectiveness depends.  
Session 2: Group Work and Presentation by Looking at Pictur es 
At first, we will instruct the students to see the pictures of different landforms from the 
History and Social Science textbook and ask some relevant questions.  
Questions for the Students  
Do you know the names of these geographical locations? Have you been to any of these? 
What are they like? Where are they located? Can you find any similarities or dissimilarities 
between them? What similarities or dissimilarities do you find?  
Also, what other different types of places do you know?  
Posing these question s, we will impart some ideas about landforms to the students.  
 
● Students will create a dictionary of landforms. The students already have an idea of 
landforms. This time, they will know about different types of landforms, their names, 
their characteristi cs, and how they are formed. For that, we will give them a fun task. 
That is to create a dictionary of landforms.  
38 
 ● Our Roles in this session: We will ask the students, "What if we each made a 
dictionary of known and unknown landforms?" This time, we will e xplain to students 
what a dictionary means. Later, we will guide them on how to create a dictionary of 
landforms.  
● Instructions on writing a dictionary on landforms: In this case, they will each bring a 
diary to make a dictionary, which we will inform them of in the previous class. At this 
stage, they will all write the names of different types of landforms on the board. We 
will instruct them not to repeat the same name. Then, they will write it down and draw 
pictures of it in their diaries. A sample of what  the dictionary will look like is given in 
their textbook. If they write the name of a landform that they cannot find in the 
booklet, we, the teachers, will help them. Apart from the landform -related information 
given in the booklet, they can also collect the necessary information from the internet, 
library, newspaper, map, any other book, video, and interview of an experienced 
person. They may draw pictures by hand or may take from any other source. In that 
case, they have to mention or recognize the sourc e from where they have collected the 
picture (they probably have learned it in Digital Technology class). Each student must 
create the title page and table of contents at the top of their dictionary. We will write 
on the board some of the things that must be in the dictionary made by them: - Name 
of the landform (as a title) - Definition of the landform - Characteristics of the 
landform - Examples of such landforms in our country - Examples of such famous 
landforms in the world - Mention if there is any int eresting event or subject. We will 
explain to them that if they come to know about any new landforms in the future, they 
can add it to the dictionary. We will tell them that sometimes they may exchange each 
other's dictionaries. Following this process, one  gets a chance to correct if any terrain 
is left out.  
  
39 
 Sessions 2 -5: Group Work and Presentation by Looking at Pictures  
                                        Identifying Landforms on the Map  
This time, we want the students to know about the special landforms of Bangladesh, to be 
able to mark the location on the map, and also to know about the natural disasters related to 
the landforms. They will mark the list of special landforms of Bangladesh on the map and 
make a list of related natural disasters.  
Things to do in this session  
● For this purpose, we will first ask the students about their house's landforms, 
grandfathers, uncles, etc. They will tell you about the landforms they know. We would 
also like to know about the changes and differences in different seasons. Through 
discussion, the students will make a list of special landforms in Bangladesh and mark 
them on the map. At the end, we will hang a map (made or purchased by the teacher) 
of the special landforms of Bangladesh. Students will match the self -made map with 
the standard one.  
 
World Travel Ludo Game and Discussion about Natural Disasters  
Things to do in this session  
● Now let us ask the students, "Are there any changes in these landforms that may cause 
us danger? For example, changes in rivers, ocean waves, etc. From this discussion, we 
will give them an idea of natural disasters. They then brainstorm the names of 
different disasters associated with landforms and write them down —natural disasters 
related to landforms, for example, river erosion and flood.  
● This time, we will divide the students into eight (08) groups and ask them to mark the 
features of the landforms o f the eight (08) divisions of Bangladesh and add pictures of 
special natural disasters related to them. They can be given separate maps of eight 
(08) divisions for this. The features can be written on top of the section like a book 
where a picture or text pops up when opened (pop -up books). It should be placed in 
such a way that the following text can be read by turning over like a page. At the end 
of the work, they will put everything together and fill the map by attaching it to the 
wall. Everyone will see  the others ’ work, and if they find something new through the 
discussion, they will add it.  
40 
 ● The students already know about Bangladesh's landforms and area -based disasters. 
This time, we will introduce them to the geography of the world. Then, we will take  
the students through an interesting learning experience. The students will play the 
World Tour or World Geography Ludo. That is why let us tell them the rules of the 
game. We will tell the students the day before that they have been given a world tour 
ludo, and they have to glue it nicely on a hard paper board. We should also remind 
them to make ludo balls and sixes or buy them from the market.  
 
● All the students will be provided with a separately printed World Tour Ludo Book. 
However, only printed paper wi ll be given. We will guide the students so that they can 
make the ludo board beautifully.  
 
Rules of World Tour Ludo Game  
The students will be divided into groups of 5 -6 people and play the game. A maximum of two 
teams can play on each board. Each team will have a captain. A coin toss will decide which 
team will start the game first. If you score 1, you can start your journey  around the world, not 
before that. The starting point of the journey is Dhaka. One member of the team will start the 
game. The captain will choose who starts the game. Each board will appoint a referee to see 
whether the game has been conducted properly. The captains of the two teams will decide 
who will be the referee. The referee will not be able to participate in the game. A student will 
keep track of points scored. The students will encounter an event at every stoppage. There, 
he/she will be asked a qu estion. If he/she can answer that question correctly, he/she will 
advance some steps on the ludo board, and if he or she has failed to answer correctly, he/she 
has to go some steps behind (See Appendix -2 for the Detailed Rules). Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands  carries 100 points where all the players have to reach. The first team to reach the 100 -
point benchmark wins the game.  
 
  
41 
 Session 6: Study Tour  
● We will start the work of the study tour well in advance as per the study tour plan 
attached in the appendix.  In this work, we will make a committee with the teachers of 
other subjects related to the students and complete the arrangement with as many 
students as possible. On the day of the visit, the students will be involved in all kinds 
of activities. Caution a nd safety should be the main priority.  
● Tell me whether the idea of the natural structure without the educational tour is 
complete. This time, let us plan a study tour for the students, which they will arrange 
independently.  
● We should invite the students  and plan a study tour together. The plan can be 
formulated following the table given in the textbook.  
● Each student will make a travel diary at the end of the study tour. In the diary, they 
will write small paragraphs about the experiences they have gone through and what 
they have seen. Then, they will paste the hand -sketched/ snapped pictures of the 
scenes  and the landforms they have seen in a camera. They should continue writing 
diaries whenever they go on a trip or tour in the future.  
● A sample checklist for planning a study tour is given in Annexure 1.  
 
Session 7: The Story of Dharmagola  
Things to do i n this session  
● As we already know, change is an important concept in History and Social science. In 
this sequence, students will explore various natural and social changes and their 
interrelationships by implementing small tasks within their boundaries. H opefully, 
one day, they will be able to take responsibility as global citizens. In this sequence, we 
will let them do some individual and group work. First, we will encourage the 
students to explore the social structure, and for that purpose, we will ask t hem to read 
"The Story of Dharmagola" written in the book.  
● Group discussion: Now, using the table, ask the students to find out what institutions 
and laws of the society are mentioned in the "The Story of Dharmagola ”. 
● Using the chart, students will identify in groups the institutions and rules, culture, and 
values of society that are mentioned in the story. We will tell the students that now let 
us know some important things about society and social institutions.  
 
42 
 Session 7: Open Discussion, Lecture, and Teacher -Student Dialogue  
Things to do in this session  
● We will first make the students interested in society and social structure through an 
open discussion. Questions for open discussion: what is society? With whom or  with 
what elements a society is built? Through which process is a society formed?  
● Tell the students: To understand the answers to these questions, we need to know 
about the social structure. How is a society organized? Social structure provides the 
answe r. 
● Social Structure is the stable organization of social institutions. In which people live 
together, and human -to-human interaction or exchange occurs, values, culture, rules, 
and customs are formed.  
● Now, using this idea, we will ask the students to find social institutions and human -to-
human interaction from “The Story of Dharmagola".  
● Social institutions and people -to-people interactions are flooded in “The Story of 
Dharmagola" when villagers run out of food. At that time, all the families of the 
society  who had food gathered together and prepared food for everyone in the society. 
Those who had no food contributed to the welfare of society by laboring or working. 
However, many institutions have also worked for the well -being of the people of the 
society. For example, the government is providing relief to those areas. Again, the 
Union Office has delivered that relief to the people. Moreover, schools, education 
departments, police, and other institutions have also worked for the welfare of society.  
● This tim e, we will add new questions to the student's discussion. For example, how 
did this interaction develop between the people of Demra village and the social 
institutions? That is, why did people and institutions communicate or interact?  
● The villagers of the  story believed that no one could live alone. They feel proud to 
help other people. They thought it was a good job. Thus, whether good or bad, any of 
these beliefs determine how people behave. Most people in society want to be known 
as good to everyone. Th en, they try to do what everyone in the society thinks is good. 
These beliefs and sense of right and wrong are what we call values. Again, all the 
actions in the society that are not good or bad but that the people of the society have 
used to do for many y ears are known as culture. These elements of a culture are 
known as customs. Therefore, the social structure is formed from the interaction of all 
these elements.  
43 
 Session 8: Work on Social Interaction in your Own Area and Arrange Formal Speech and 
Dialogue  Session on Social Structure and Its Role  
Things to do in this session  
● Now, ask the students to identify a collective initiative or any other topic from their 
local community. Students will then explore the people -to-people and people -to-
institution intera ctions in that society on that initiative or issue. They will write 
descriptions of social institutions and people -to-people interactions in their respective 
living areas in notebooks or posters.  
● This time, they may be asked a thought -provoking question to  explain the social 
norms, policies, culture, etc.  
Thought -provoking question: What clothes do men wear, and what clothes do women wear in 
most cases in our country? However, who decides what the girls will wear and what the 
boys? [We learn from our parent s.] So, how do the parents know who should wear which 
clothes? [They learn from their grandparents] If we again ask, "From where did the 
grandparents know? ” Thus, we understand that we have dug into our past. So, from this 
discussion, we understand that ou r social behavior is defined even before our birth.  
Through these discussions, dialogues, and lectures with the students, we will convey the 
following ideas:  
The process of society formation and social structure was determined even before our birth. 
Socia l structure defines our social behavior. Society determines how we should behave, what 
we should say, what we should wear, and so on, considering different situations. We merely 
follow it. However, social structure changes over time. The change may happen slowly. A 
social structure's purpose is to fulfill a society's collective goal. It helps the people of society 
prepare themselves for the future and helps them gain social prestige. It also prepares people 
to adapt to culture and norms. Thus, interrelated social groups and the related institutions 
where the people live, grow, and consider themselves a part of it –collectively, these are the 
parts of social structure. In these social groups, the notables are family, educational 
institutions, different clubs, etc. The people of a society like to interact with the people of 
other societies. This group of people creates harmony in society, and this attitude fosters 
growth, creates a strong bond, keeps them safe, and also creates an opportunity to present 
themselv es in front of others. Through this process, a person presents himself as a part of a 
collective whole.  
44 
 For example, Shapla is a 12 -year-old girl. She has reached such a phase of her life that she 
has started to think of herself as a unique member of socie ty. She participated as a member of 
the school football and kabadi team. She enjoys playing these games. Naturally, she makes 
some friends by participating in these games. Over time, she discovers herself as a good 
player. At the same time, she has develop ed herself into a very good team member. She 
excels in communication as she has to communicate with the teachers, teammates, and 
players of other teams. It develops her personality. This development of her personality 
makes her a unique member of society.  
On the other hand, her sister becomes a science club member. Her mode of communication is 
different as she interacts with people interested in science and members of different scientific 
institutions. Though Shapla and her sister belong to the same family,  their process of growth 
and development is completely different. As the two sisters ’ modes and areas of 
communication are different, their growth and development as a person in society are 
different, too. We may notice such cases frequently. Through this process, we can easily 
understand how social structure plays a pivotal role in the life of every person in a society.  
Session 9: Elements of Social Structur e 
Things to do in this session  
 Through discussion, question and answer sessions, lectures, and the use of tables, we 
will try to give an idea of two types of elements of social structure. Necessary 
concepts are given below:  
The elements of social structure can be divided into two class es. 1) Social customs, 
values, and beliefs play a vital role in determining people's thought processes and 
behavior. 2) Social Institutions – for example, family, education, culture, media, and 
government through which social structure was controlled. Soci al structure is formed with 
some elements; they are social  roles, social status, social networks, parties or groups, and 
institutions. We may see it through a diagram.  
Social Role: what a person does and what is expected from him is related to a person ’s role in 
society. For example, Aviram works as a cleaner, and he cleans road trash. It can be that 
society is looking down upon him. From a different angle, his works can be seen as essential. 
The reason can be that social life can be impossible without any  cleaning work.  
45 
 Social Status: social status defines where a person stays in society. We can say it is a 
parameter to determine his/her social position. To determine a person's social status, some 
issues or factors are considered, such as assets, occupati onal designation, family heritage 
(aristocracy), educational qualifications, and other related issues like clothing, food habits, 
and cultural tastes.  
Social Networking: Interaction between people of different groups and others creates a type 
of networkin g. How these groups interact with others bears a major discussion point in social 
networking. For example, Munia is a member of the Active Citizens Club. It may be the case 
that she has to interact with the local Union Office or Upazilla Social Welfare Off ice. Being a 
member of this club, she gets an opportunity to interact with the people of these government 
offices. Thus, Munia understands how the people of other institutions see these clubs. Party 
or groups and institutions refer to the established form of social relation. We see these 
institutions around us —for example, family, culture, politics, law, government, state, 
economics, and education. Different parties and institutions create greater social structure and 
also create an opportunity for the mode s of relationship. For example, there are 42 students in 
this class. Thus, the class teacher can interact with at least 42 of these students' guardians. On 
a large scale, the teacher has an opportunity to interact with 42 families.  
Family as a Part of Soc ial Structure  
Family is the primary and the most important element of social structure. Family is the 
first social institution in the life of a person. Thus, people belong to an institution titled 
family. At the same time, he is an active member of this in stitution. Family shapes a 
person, like how they behave, what they wear, and how they develop. Through a family, a 
person understands how he should behave, what role he should play as a member of 
society, what he will be in the future, and how others will judge him for doing right or 
wrong. Therefore, what will be her social position? For example, Ganesh was taught by 
his family that if he behaved well with other people, then everybody would consider him 
a good person. His interaction with society becomes e asy, he will benefit in his 
workplace, and his bonding with others will be strong. However, if he behaves rudely 
with other people, they w ill consider him a bad person.  
Examples of Social Structure: we may mention the name of the following institution as 
part of the social structure.  
46 
 Society, Rivers, Oceans, States, Deserts, Plainlands, Religions, Government, Law, 
Culture  
 
 Every structure has definite roles and purposes. These elements of social structure 
collectively give us a sense of unity and safety . For example, family, government, and 
state. Family: it provides us with fundamental safety and security in our childhood. 
Government: it ensures safety and security for all by making laws and through 
different law enforcement agencies like Police, Ansar,  etc. 
States: The state itself is a part of a larger social structure. This social structure also 
plays a vital role in formulating the basic principles of a state. The state ensures its 
existence before us by providing various services (education, medicine, foo d, habitat, 
security, communication and entertainment).  
 
Law and Order, Values, Rituals and Customs  
Values, rituals, customs, and local and national laws govern social structure. As a part 
of this social structure, man obeys these rules and regulations, values, rituals, and 
customs. These social elements control Different lifestyle issues, like quarrels,  
conflicts, possession of lands, inheritance, and other issues related to different 
benefits.    
 
Culture  
 
Culture refers to the collective behavioral pattern of a group of people in a locality. As 
part of a society, the things we do regularly and if thes e doings are particularly 
different from other people, then this everyday lifestyle is a part of our culture. 
Everything related to our lifestyles is a part of our culture. For example, we talk about 
the types of food we eat, how we eat, language, clothing , games, rituals, art and 
culture, religion, and other related issues.  
Cultural differences may exist in different parts of the same country or between two 
countries. For example, we see one type of culture in the coastal areas of a country; in 
contrast, we see other types of culture in North Bengal and in the hilly areas. Thus, the 
culture of Bangladesh consists of these diverse lifestyles.    
 
47 
 Religion and other belief -based institutions conduct and rear a community by giving 
special beliefs, rules and r egulations, codes of life, and points of view. Obeying these 
codes of life and points of view is significant for the followers. By following religious 
beliefs and rituals, people live in a religious community. Sometimes, the culture of a 
country may seem w eird or funny to the people of other countries. Again, our culture 
may seem funny to others. For example, (1) In Venezuela, if you are invited to a 
particular house as a guest and attend there on time, they will consider you greedy and 
gluttonous. It is ap propriate to attend a few moments later than the stipulated time. (2) 
On the other hand, never congratulate a Chinese friend with a flower bouquet 
because, in their culture, only a dead person receives a flower bouquet. However, 
every person considers thei r culture decent and appropriate. That is why we should 
not judge a culture. We should never compare the culture of one country with the 
other. This world is beautiful only because of its diver sity.  
Sessions 11 to 12: Investigative Work or Inquiry -based W ork  
Things to do in this session  
 We will ask the students to form a group of 5 -6 people and instruct them to find out 
how the society and culture were before and how it is now by following the steps of 
inquiry.  
 We will remind them about the steps of inq uiry. If needed, we will instruct them to go 
through the chapter "Looking Around through the Lens of Science" and read the 
scientific steps of experiential learning.  
 We will allocate one working day for data collection. After collecting relevant data, 
they will analyze it and present the results to the class.  
 
Sessions 13 to 14: Determining the Social Position of Our  Family Members and their Roles  
Things to do in this  session  
 We will instruct the students to determine the social position and the roles of the 
family members. For this purpose, we will instruct them to use the following table.  
 For this, we will tell the students to sit with their team. Then, we will tel l them to 
determine the social position and the roles of the family members. They will fill out 
the information using the table.  
48 
  We will tell them to find out how social and political culture influences a person's 
social position and his/her roles.  
 They will share the table and present the findings in the group discussion.  
                              
  
49 
 The Interrelation between Natural and Social Structure  
Grade -based Competency 6.7 : By discussing the various changes between natural and social 
structures, the students will discover their interrelationships and behave responsibly  
 
Number of Sessions: 14                                                                       Working Hours: 11 
Hours   
Description of the Overall Task  
To achieve this competency, the teacher will first follow three steps and create a situation of 
inquiry where the students will conduct the inquiry on the relationship betwee n social 
structure  and nature.  
In the first step, the teacher will use the pictures from the story 'Shyamoli', where the reasons 
for wildlife extinction are mentioned under the chapter titled "Nature Conservation Activity." 
After seeing the pictures, the students will thin k of the pollution caused by industrial waste. 
Then, they will share their experience. After that, they will visit an industrial site and search 
for the impact of the natural environment on the change in the social environment. After that, 
the students, th rough different activities, inquire about the relationship between social 
structure and natural structure. They will also inquire about the local and global impact of it.  
 
In the second step, the teacher will create an opportunity for inquiry through diff erent 
activities on how the changes of the elements of natural structure bring changes in social 
structure.  
In the third step, through understanding, they will behave responsibly in their local social 
environment.  
The activities are demonstrated step by step in the experiential learning cycle that the  students 
are going to follow.  
1. Contextual Experience  
Following the scientific steps of inquiry, the students will investigate the elements of 
society in two phases. First, they will visit an industry in thei r locality as part of the 
social environment. Second, they will investigate rivers and their different conditions 
as part of the element of the natural environment.  
50 
  
2. Reflective Observation  
a. They will reflect their experiential learning by presenting the d ata obtained from 
scientific inquiry.  
b. They will determine how a small change in the elements of the social environment 
affects the natural environment and vice versa.  
3. Abstract Conceptualization  
The students will get some idea about the interrelation bet ween natural and social 
elements in their locality and how the same occurs in a global context. Considering 
this, they will make a list of some works.   
4. Active Testing  
They will find ways of keeping their locality safe and implement those.  
 
Finding the interrelationship of the elements of the social environment with the natural 
environment …. 
Functions: Sessions 1 -10 
Theme: Visiting an Industrial Site as Part of Social Structure  
Session 1: Understanding the interrelation and making plans to pay a visit  
Session 2: Visiting the industrial site  
Sessions 3 -4: Group presentation after visit  
 
 
Theme: Local Impact of it and Relat e it to Global Context  
Session 5: Experimentation of local impact and its results  
Session 6: Experimentation of global impact and result -related comic graphics study. 
Filling out the table.  
Theme: Working with Rivers and Finding the Impact of Natural Structure on Social 
Life  
Sessions 7 -8: Solving river puzzle and searching the usage of land  
Session 9: Searching the impact of human life on the change of rivers  
Sessions 10 -11: Inquiry -based work Civilization developed on the river bank.  
Theme: Express Students ’ Responsibility  
Sessions12 -14: Finding ways of keeping your locality safe and implementing the ways   
51 
  
Theme: Visiting an industrial site as a part of the elements of social structure  
Session 1: Understanding the interrelation and planni ng to visit an industrial site  
Things to do in this session  
Through this session, the students will inquire about the relationship between social structure 
and natural structure.  
 As part of this session, they will see the pictures of the story 'Shyamoli', where the 
reasons for wildlife extinction are mentioned in the chapter titled "Nature 
Conservation Activity." The teacher may ask questions on how the industry is 
polluting the environment. If the teacher wants, he/she can share some pre -collected 
pictures with the classroom. The teacher may ask questions like the  following: 1. 
What type of product is produced through their known industry? 2. What kind of raw 
materials are used? 3. What are the essential elements of transforming/processing the 
raw materials? From where these elements were collected? 4. What other t hings can 
be produced as the by -product? What problems may they create?  
This discussion will focus on raw materials, processing materials, e.g., fuel, and 
industrial waste.  
 Later, the students will get help from the teacher and go on an industrial site v isit 
close to their school (brick kiln or any other industry).  
 Things to do before the visit: Upon discussion, they need to prepare a set of questions 
about how the industries affect the natural environment.  
 The teacher will notice whether the students i nclude subjects related to raw materials, 
fuel, industrial wastes, and sources in their questions.   
Questions for the visit:  
1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
 
 Later, the students analyze the questions and find out the key elements.  
52 
 Table of inquiry: Raw materials  
Raw materials  Sources of raw 
materials  Impact of raw 
materials collection 
and use on the 
natural environment  Results  
    
 
Table of inquiry: Fuel/Energy used to process raw materials   
Fuel/Energy  Source of raw 
materials  Fuel/Energy 
collection and its 
impact on nature  Results  
    
 
Table of inquiry: Industrial waste  
Waste   Source of Waste  Impact of industrial 
waste on nature  Results  
    
 
Sessions 2 -4: Visiting the industrial site and group presentation after visit  
Things to do in this session   
In this session, the students will go on an industrial site visit, and following the steps of 
inquiry, they will collect data, analyze it, present the results, and make a decision.  
The teacher will pre -select an industrial site for the visit and ensure safety for the visiting 
students. Safety comes first.  
The teacher will say, "In the next class, we will discuss whether other elements of social 
structure have any effects on the environment."  
Theme: Results and impacts of changes on Local area and setting relation on the global 
context  
Session 5: Experimentation of the impacts of changes on local area  
53 
 Things to do in this session   
In this phase, w e will understand that the obtained result is not only local but also global. As 
part of this phase, we will arrange a session on experimentation.  
 In this phase, the teacher will divide the students into three (03) groups. The first 
group will go under a tree with an ice cube on a bowl and a stopwatch; the second 
group will go under the direct sunlight with an ice cube on a bowl and a stopwatch, 
and the third will go to them with two thermometers and a covered glass. Groups 1 
and 2 will wait until the ice melts. Group 3 will place the two glasses under the sun: 
one without a cover plus a thermometer inside and the other with a cover plus a 
thermometer inside. Then, they will record the temperature at regular intervals. After 
that, they will wait for 10 -15 m inutes.      
 Later, each group will present their experience using a chart paper with the other 
teams.  
 The experience of Groups 1 & 2:  
Group 1  Ice melting time  Cause  
Group 2    
 
 The experience of Group 3:  
Thermometer Number 1  Temperature after 10-15 minutes ----- 
Thermometer number 2  Temperature after 10 -15 minutes ----- 
  
Session 6: Reading Comics related to the global impact and result and filling out the table  
Things to do in this session  
 Now, we will tell the globally recognized name of the experiment that they have done. 
Therefore, we will instruct them to read the comics.  
 After reading, the students will present the causes of destruction mentioned in the 
comics using the following table .  
Pollution  Green House Effect  Global Warming  Climate Change  
1.   
2.   
3.  1.   
2.    
3.  1.   
2.   
3.   1.   
2.   
3.   
54 
  
…. ……  ……..  ……..  
   
Theme:  Working with Rivers and Finding the Impact of N atural Structure on Social 
Life 
Session 7 -8: Playing River Puzzle &  Finding the usage of land   
In this session, we will try to make the students understand how the changes in natural 
structure affect the social environment.  
 To understand this matter, they will read the story titled "Shyamoli" from the chapter 
"Nature Conservation Activity" and identify how the changes in natural structure 
affect the social environment in groups.  
 In this phase, we will have an open discussion  about a well -known natural structure, a 
river. We may include the following in our discussion: land, land usage, residence, 
city, village, farm, industry and houses. We will list the students' ideas on the 
whiteboard.  
 Later, we will instruct the students  to form groups and provide them with a picture 
with a river puzzle. Then, we will ask them to cut it following the lines. Now, the 
students will arrange the puzzles at their own will. They need to place the source and 
destination part of the river puzzle at the proper place, or else they have some liberty 
to arrange the middle part. Then, we will ask the students to paste it on a chart paper 
with tapes.  
 In the next step, with the help of the puzzles and upon group discussion, they will 
record for what pur poses the land of the riverbank is used.  
 
Session 9: Inquiry about the impact of rivers on human life  
In this phase, we will help the students to understand the interrelationship of river and human 
life. As part of this work, we may ask, “You have prepare d a model of a river. What if the 
river disappears or the river course changes suddenly? ”  
 The students may see pictures from the textbook, and there, they will notice the 
changes like river erosion, drying up the river, and changing the river course.  
 Teachers may show pre -collected pictures as well.  
55 
  We may ask some questions to the students – 
1. What condition of the river we may see in the pictures?  
2. What kind of impact does it bring to our lives?  
 In this phase, the students, divided into groups, may disc uss the process of drying up 
the river, changes in the river course, and river erosion. Then, record the findings in a 
chart paper and present it.  
Present Situation of the 
River   Cause  Impact on social life  
River Erosion    
Drying up the river     
Changing the river course     
 
 Now, the students will share their experiences with others, whether they have seen 
any such impact on their lives or the lives of others.  
 We may share some real stories about the sufferings (e.g., changing permanent 
address and livelihood) due to river erosion.  
 
Sessions 10 -11: Inquiry -based work on Riverine Civilization  
In this session, we may discuss how these types of incidents also took  place in the past.  
 At this stage, students will conduct an inquiry to find out the civilizations that have 
developed on the riverbanks from ancient times to the present day. They need to 
conduct an inquiry into how the rivers have influenced these civili zations.  
 For the inquiry, they must collect data from different sources like related books, the 
internet, and booklets. They need to follow the steps of inquiry in analyzing and 
presenting the scripts.  
 
Theme: Expression of Student Responsibility  
Sessions 12 -14: Explore and Implement ways to keep your locality/neighborhood 
healthy  
56 
  In this phase, we will explain that the riverine civilization did not last long due to the 
lack of a favorable environment. So, what can we do to make our neighborhood 
healthy?  
 To select the field of work, they have to make a list of some works. They will select 
one from the list and implement it through the Active Citizens Club. We will notice 
the fact whether they engage the senior citizens and the older members of the ir 
families in this work or not.  
 For nature conservation, they need to behave responsibly and practice what they have 
learned from the textbook chapter titled “Nature Conservation Activity ”.  
 
                                                  
  
57 
 Society an d Resources  
Competency 6.8: Be able to explore how resource management structures develop over 
time and across regions  
Number of Sessions: 7                                                                           Working Hours: 6 
Hours  
Concept of overall  tasks for this competency:  
To achieve this competency, we will show students different pictures from the textbook and 
ask them to identify the objects in the pictures. Students will be introduced to the concept of 
resources by finding properties of things  through group work. Students will be given details 
of various types of resources by participating in quizzes and answering questions. We will ask 
them to list things they use in daily life. Afterward, we will visit the nearby factory and give 
the students  an idea about the past and present production system through assignments.  
Below are the activities that students will undertake at different stages of the experiential 
learning cycle.  
1. Contextual Experience  
Students will identify different types of resources around them.  
2. Reflective Observation  
Students will identify different types of resources like sources, markets, commodities, 
products, and services.  
3. Abstract conceptualization  
Students will make the necessary preparations for the factory vis it based on their reflections.  
58 
 4. Active Testing  
Students will visit the factory and learn about the present -day production system. Next, we 
will explore the past and present changes in production systems. Using information on past 
production systems from various media, they will conduct an inquiry on it.   
Session 1: Kinds of Resources  
In this session, we will show the students some pictures and let them work in groups to find 
out what the objects in the pictures can do for us. Through group work, students will 
understand that the pictures are of different resources and that resources are basically of three 
types (natural resources, human resources, and transformed resources). Different types of 
resources will be introduced by participating in quizzes and ma king lists of different types of 
resources.  
Things to do in this session  
 Viewing pictures: At the beginning of the session, we will show the students some 
pictures from the ‘Society and Resources ’' section of  History and Social Science  
textbooks. Students will look at the pictures. We will ask, "What do they see, and 
what do these pictures together say?" Students will tell the important features of the 
pictures. From the characteristics given by the students, we will explain that the 
objects in the picture together are called resources. Through this discussion, students 
will understand that whatever we see around us, everything is our resource.  
Classification according to features of the Resources : 
We will divide the students into groups  of 5 to 6 people. Students will sit in groups and sort 
the pictures according to type. We will praise students' work and ask what characteristics 
students have to work on when sharing resources. From the discussion with the students, 
some ideas will emerg e - some resources we get from nature, humans create some resources, 
59 
 and some resources that people use to perform various tasks. Based on these characteristics, 
resources can be divided into three categories (natural resources, human resources, and 
transf ormed resources). At this stage, elicit more resource names from the students. We will 
say, "Now, let us try to find some more examples of different types of resources." we will ask 
the students to find and list more examples of these three types. Students  will work in groups 
to name and list new resources. We will listen to some groups and check whether students' 
understanding of the three types of resources is clear.  
Quiz on Classification:  
We will list 20 different types of assets in advance to organize the quiz. According to the rules 
of inclusion, students will be divided into groups of six (06) students. We will then name the 
resources one by one. Team members who are sure that they know what type of resource it is 
will raise their hands. The group tha t raises their hand will get to answer first. If the answer is 
correct, each group will get 05 marks for each correct answer. If the answer is incorrect, the 
next team will get a chance to answer, and if correct, they will get 05 marks. If they cannot, 
then the next team will get the chance. In this way, we would like to know the types of 
resources by naming 20 resources individually. The team that gets the highest score will be 
the winner. We will tell the names of the types of resources that no party coul d answer 
correctly.  
Sessions 2 to 3: Natural Resources, Commodities, Products and Markets  
Students will get a detailed understanding of renewable and non -renewable natural resources, 
commodities, products, and markets.  
Things to do in this session  
 Concepts  of natural resources, commodities, products, and markets:  
60 
  We will tell the students to read from History and Social Science textbooks one by 
one about renewable and non -renewable natural resources, products, goods, and 
markets. Other students will listen attentively.  
 Making a List of Daily Life Necessities: Next, we will ask you to do one more thing 
to get an idea of the items you use daily. We will instruct the students to list what 
products they use every day, from when they wake up in the morning to w hen they go 
to bed at night, and where those products come from. Students will all work in groups 
to list the items they use every day using the table from the 'Society and Resources' 
chapter of their History and Social Science  textbooks. In the next column, write where 
you get the product from.   
 
 Each team will then present their prepared list. After listening to everyone's 
presentation, we will tell the class about the factories where many of the products we 
use are produced. We would like to know whether the students have ever visited the 
factory. In the next class, we will take the students to visit the nearest factory. That is 
why we would ask everyone to prepare a set of questions according to the guidelines 
mentioned in th e appendix of History and Social Science textbooks. We must prepare 
well for the visit at least three weeks in advance. After confirming three things, we 
will go on a visit or study tour with the students. The three issues are - to complete all 
kinds of co mmunication and other arrangements to ensure the safety of the students, 
to obtain signatures on the consent letters of the parents, and to arrange transportation, 
food, and other materials necessary for visits or educational trips.  
 
Sessions 4 to 5: On t he Production of Wealth   
61 
 In this session, the students will visit a nearby factory. Students will learn about the current 
production system by visiting ice cream/biscuit/soap factories/garments/brick kilns. Create 
questions to inquire about past production  systems.  
Things to do in this session  
 We will ask everyone in the class to prepare for the factory visit. In preparation, the 
students will prepare a plan of inquiry following the steps of inquiry learned in 
'Looking Around Through the Lens of Science'. W e will take all the students of the 
class, their parents, and other teachers of the school who have time to visit a nearby 
ice cream/biscuit/soap factory/garments/brick kiln.  
 During the factory visit, we will make sure that all students are looking at the inquiry 
table mentioned in the ‘Society and Resources ’ chapter of the History and Social 
Science textbook and taking notes on observations. We would encourage everyone to 
take notes. In the next class, everyone will present their findings from the factory visit 
using different media (multimedia/posters, etc.). After everyone's presentation, we 
will explain to everyone how the production is currently done in the factory. Then, we 
want to know how the production was done in the past. Later, divide the student s into 
groups and guide them to carry out research activities on the past production systems.  
Sessions 6 -7:  
 Students will be divided into groups of 5 -6. In groups, everyone will develop 
questions for inquiry to find out how production was done in the past . All groups will 
formulate the questions of inquiry, and together, they will formulate the final set of 
questions of inquiry. The students will collect information about past production 
systems by collecting information from reliable sources, including te xtbooks, other 
books, magazines, or the internet.  
62 
  Data obtained through an inquiry about the past production systems will be presented 
in the classroom using various media and submitted to us. We will save them. Now, 
we will present the production methods of the past through role -playing according to 
the data obtained from the findings mentioned in the report.  
 
 First, the team will be formed. Select a specific item from anything you use daily, a 
product bought from the market, or any food. Choose the food i tem—for example, 
cakes, mobile phones, combs, chips, or anything like these. Now, conduct an inquiry 
for 1. Trace from where the product came. For example, Pitha is made by Baba. 
However, what was used to make it? Where did they come from? Shop? How did it  
come to the store? In this way, find the source of the material related to it. 2. 
Which/how many (maybe more than one) production systems were involved and 
how? 3. Who is engaged with this production system and how? 4. What kind of 
changes have occurred i n this production system over time? 5. Discovering different 
forms of this production system in other parts of the country or outside the country.  
 Then, instruct the students to role -play based on the information and results obtained 
from ancient human production methods.  
***